For the verses:
cat -s bg_edited.txt | grep "\!" -v | grep "," -v | grep "[A-Z]" -v | grep ^"(18" -v  | grep "...(18\...)"$ -B 4 | tr -s "\n"  | less

For the translations:


SRIMAD BHAGAVAD-GITA

First Discourse

The Hopelessness of Arjuna



dhrtarastra uvaca

dharma-ksetre kuru-ksetre samaveta yuyutsavah

mamakah pandavas caiva kim akurvata sanjaya (1.01)

dhrtarastrah uvaca - (King) Dhrtarastra said; dharma-ksetre - on the sacred
plain, the field of religion; kuru-ksetre — the place named Kuruksetra;
samavetah - gathered together; yuyutsavah - desirous to fight, eager for battle;
mamakah - sons... and mine (sons); pandavah — the sons of Pandu; ca — and;
eva — certainly; kim — what; akurvata - did do, did they do; sanjaya — O
Sanjaya.

Dhrtarastra said:

O Sanjaya, what did the sons of Pandu and mine do when they gathered on

the sacred plain of Kuruksetra, eager for battle? (1.01)

sanjaya uvaca

drstva tu pandavanikam vyudham duryodhanas tada

acaryam upasangamya raja vacanam abravit (1.02)

sanjayah uvaca — Sanjaya said; drstva - having seen; tu — indeed; pandava-
anikam — the army (soldiers) of the Pandavas; vyudham - ranged for battle, in
battle array; duryodhanah - King/Prince Duryodhana; tada - then, at that time;
acaryam — teacher; upasangamya - approaching, having approached; raja — the
king (prince); vacanam - speech, words; abravit — spoke.

Sanjaya said: Having seen the army of the Pandavas ranged for battle,
Prince Duryodhana went up to his acarya (teacher), Drona, and said: (1.02)

pasyaitam pandu-putranam acarya mahatim camum
vyudham drupada-putrena tava sisyena dhimata (1.03)

pasya - look, behold; etam — this; pandu-putranam — of the sons of Pandu;
acarya — O teacher; mahatim - great; camum — , army, military force; vyudham
- positioned/arranged, marshalled ; drupada-putrena — the son of Drupada; tava
- your; sisyena - by your pupil/disciple; dhi-mata - talented, very intelligent.

Look, O Teacher, at this mighty army of the sons of Pandu, which has been
positioned by your talented pupil, the son of Drupada. (1.03)

atra sura mahesv-asa bhimarjuna-sama yudhi
yuyudhano viratas ca drupadas ca maha-rathah (1.04)

atra - here (there); surah - heroes, peers; maha-isu-asah — mighty archers;
bhima-arjuna — to Bhima and Arjuna; samah — equal; yudhi — in the fight/battle
; yuyudhanah — Yuyudhana; viratah — Virata; ca — also; drupadah — Drupada;
ca — also; maha-rathah — great warrior (fighter), of the great car.

There are in it heroes, mighty archers, equal in battle to Bhima and
Arjuna: Yuyudhana, Virata, and the great warrior (mahdratha) Drupada,
(1.04)

dhrstaketus cekitanah kasirajas ca viryavan

purujit kuntibhojas ca saibyas ca nara-pungavah (1.05)

dhrstaketuh — Dhrstaketu; cekitanah — Cekitana; kasirajah - Kasiraja (king of
Kasi) (rajah:king); ca - also, and; virya-van - valiant; purujit — Purujit;
kuntibhojah — Kuntibhoja; ca — and; saibyah — Saibya; nara-pungavah -
prominent in human society, the best of men.

Dhrishtaketu, Cekitana, and the valiant king of Kasi, Purujit, Kuntibhoja,
and the prominent man Saibya, (1.05)

yudhamanyus ca vikranta uttamaujas ca viryavan
saubhadro draupadeyas ca sarva eva maha-rathah (1.06)

yudhamanyuh — Yudhamanyu; ca — and; vikrantah - the courageous, heroic;
uttamaujah — Uttamauja; ca — and; virya-van - the brave, valiant; saubhadrah -

- the son of Subhadra; draupadeyah — the sons of Draupadi; sarve — all; eva —
certainly; maha-rathah - proficient charoteers (or, chariot fighters), great car
warriors.

The heroic Yudhamanyu, and the valiant Uttamauja; the son of Subhadra
and the son of Draupadi, all proficient charioteers. (1.06)






INTRODUCTION OF THE ARMY COMMANDERS

asmakam tu visista ye tan nibodha dvijottama

nayaka mama sainyasya samjnartham tan bravimi te (1.07)

asmakam — our; tu — but; visistah - powerful, distinguished chiefs,
commanders; ye — who; tan — them; nibodha - knowing, just take note of, be
informed, mentioning now; dvija-uttama — O best of the twice-born
(Brahmanas); nayakah - commanders, captains, the leaders; mama — my;
sainyasya - of (my) army, or of the soldiers; samjna-artham - by way of
example, for information; tan — them; bravimi - naming, mentioning, speaking;
te — to you.

I now mention, O best of the twice-born, who are the most distinguished
among us, the commanders of my army, naming to you by way of example.

(1.07)

bhavan bhismas ca karnas ca krpas ca samitim-jayah
asvatthama vikarnas ca saumadattis tathaiva ca (1.08)

bhavan - yourself, your good self; bhismah — Grandfather Bhisma; ca - also,
and; karnah — Kama; krpah — Krpa; samitim-jayah — always victorious in
battle/war, the victorious; asvatthama — Asvatthama; vikarnah — Vikarna;
saumadattih — the son of Somadatta; tatha — as well as; eva - certainly.

Yourself and Bhisma, Kama, the victorious Krpa, Asvatthama and
Vikarna, also Jayadratta, the son of Somadatta; (1.08)

anye ca bahavah sura mad-arthe tyakta-jivitah
nana-sastra-praharanah sarve yuddha-visaradah (1.09)

anye — others; ca — also; bahavah - many, in great numbers; surah — heroes;
mat-arthe - for me,for my sake; tyakta-jivitah - giving up their lives, who have
given up their lives; nana - various, many; sastra — weapons; praharanah -
equipped with; sarve — all of them; yuddha-visaradah - skilled in the art of
warfare, experienced in military science, well skilled in battle.

And, many other heroes giving up their lives for me, fighting with various
weapons, and all well skilled in the art of warfare. (1.09)

aparyaptam tad asmakam balam bhismabhiraksitam
paryaptam tv idam etesam balam bhimabhiraksitam (1.10)

aparyaptam - unbeatable, immeasurable, unlimited; tat — that; asmakam — of
ours; balam — army; bhisma — by Grandfather Bhisma; abhiraksitam -under the
protection, perfectly protected, marshalled/assembled by; paryaptam - limited,
insufficient, inadequate; tu — but; idam — all this; etesam — of the Pandavas;
balam - army, military strength; bhima — by Bhima; abhiraksitam — carefully
protected, marshalled/assembled by.

This army of ours, commanded by Bhisma is unbeatable, whereas that
army of theirs which is under the protection of Bhima is inadequate. (1.10)

ayanesu ca sarvesu yatha-bhagam avasthitah
bhismam evabhiraksantu bhavantah sarva eva hi (1.11)

ayanesu - in the divisions of the army; ca — also; sarvesu - everywhere, in all;
yatha-bhagam - respective positions, as differently arranged, according to
division; avasthitah - situated, being stationed; bhismam — unto Grandfather
Bhisma; eva - certainly, alone; abhiraksantu - defend, should give support,
protect; bhavantah — you; sarve - all ; eva hi - certainly, indeed.

Therefore, now, do all of you, occupying your respective positions in the
various divisions of the army, defend Bhisma only. (1.11)

tasya sanjanayan harsam kuru-vrddhah pitamahah
simha-nadam vinadyoccaih sankham dadhmau pratapavan (1.12)

tasya — his; sanjanayan — causing; harsam - joy, cheer, cheerfulness; kuru-
vrddhah — the grandsire/oldest of the Kuru dynasty (Bhisma); pitamahah — the
grandfather; simha-nadam — roaring sound, like that of a lion, lion's roar;
vinadya - having sounded vibrating; uccaih — loudly; sankham - conch,
conchshell; dadhmau — blew; pratapa-van — the mighty / valiant.

The powerful grandsire Bhisma, the eldest of the Kuru reign, in order to
cheer him (Duryodhana), roared as a lion and blew his conch. (1.12)

BATTLE STARTS AT THE BLOWING OF CONCH SHELLS

tatah sankhas ca bheryas ca panavanaka-gomukhah
sahasaivabhyahanyanta sa sabdas tumulo 'bhavat (1.13)

tatah - then, thereafter; sankhah — conchs; ca — also; bheryah - kettledrums,
large drums; ca — and; panava-anaka - Tabors, drums, also small drums and
kettledrums; gomukhah - horns, cow-horns; sahasa - quite sudden, all of a

sudden; eva — certainly; abhyahanyanta - blared forth, were simultaneously
sounded; sah — that; sabdah — combined sound; tumulah — tumultuous; abhavat

— became.

At this, and all at once, conches, kettledrums, cymbals, drums and horns
were heard, and the sound of that was uncontrolled. (1:13)

tatah svetair hay air yukta mahati syandane sthitau

madhavah pandavas caiva divyau sankhau pradadhmatuh (1.14)

tatah - then, thereafter; svetaih — with white; hayaih — horses; yukte — yoked;
mahati - magnificent, in a great; syandane — chariot; sthitau - seated, situated;
madhavah — Krsna (the husband of the goddess of fortune); pandavah — Arjuna
(the son of Pandu); ca — also; eva - also, certainly; divyau — divine; sankhau —
conchs; pradadhmatuh - blew, sounded.

Then, Madhava (Krsna) and the son of Pandu (Arjuna), who were seated in
their grand chariot yoked to white horses, blew their divine conches. (1.14)

pancajanyam hrsikeso devadattam dhananjayah

paundram dadhmau maha-sankham bhima-karma vrkodarah (1.15)

pancajanyam — the conch named Pancajanya; hrsika-isah — Hrsikesa (Krsna,
the Lord who directs the senses); devadattam — the conch named Devadatta;
dhanam-jayah — Dhananjaya (Arjuna, the winner of wealth); paundram — the
conch named Paundra; dadhmau — blew; maha-sankham — the terrific conch,
great conch; bhima-karma - doer of terrible deeds; vrka-udarah - having the
belly of a wolf, the voracious eater (Bhima).

Hrsikesa (Krsna) blew the conch Pancajanya; and Dhananjaya (Arjuna, the
winner of wealth) blew his conch Devadatta. Bhima, the performer of
terrible deeds, blew his great conch Paundra. (1.15)

anantavijayam raja kunti-putro yudhisthirah
nakulah sahadevas ca sughosa-manipuspakau (1.16)

ananta-vijayam — the conch named Ananta-vijaya; raja — the king; kunti-putrah

— the son of Kunti (Arjuna); yudhisthirah — Yudhisthira; nakulah — Nakula;
sahadevah — Sahadeva; ca — and; sughosa-mani-puspakau — the conchs named
Sughosa and Manipuspaka.

King Yudhisthira, the son of Kunti (Arjuna), blew his Anantavyaya, while
Nakula and Sahadeva blew the Sughosa and the Manipuspaka conches.
(1.16)

kasyas ca paramesv-asah khandi ca maha-rathah
dhrstadyumno viratas ca satyakis caparajitah (1.17)

kasyah - Kasya,the King of Kasi (Varanasi); ca — and; parama-isu-asah
(parama isvasah) - an excellent archer, the great archer; sikhandi — Sikhandi;
ca — also; maha-rathah - mighty car-warrior, chariot-warrior; dhrstadyumnah —
Dhrstadyumna (the son of King Drupada); viratah — Virata (the prince who
gave shelter to the Pandavas while they were in disguise); ca — also; satyakih —
Satyaki (the same as Yuyudhana, the charioteer of Lord Krsna); ca — and;
aparajitah - unconquered, who had never been vanquished.

The king of Kasi, an excellent archer; Sikhandi, the great chariot-warrior,
Dhrstadyumna, Virata, and the unconquerable Satyaki; (1.17)

drupado draupadeyas ca sarvasah prthivi-pate

saubhadras ca maha-bahuh sankhan dadhmuh prthak prthak (1.18)

drupadah — Drupada, the King of Pancala; draupadeyah — the sons of
Draupadi; ca — also; sarvasah — all; prthivi-pate — O Lord of Earth;
saubhadrah — Abhimanyu, the son of Subhadra; ca — also; maha-bahuh - the
mighty-armed; sankhan — conchs; dadhmuh — blew; prthak prthak - all
individually, each separately, respectively.

Drupada and the sons of Draupadi, O Lord of the Earth, and the mighty-
armed son of Subhadra, all individually in one accord blew their respective
conches. (1.18)

sa ghoso dhartarastranam hrdayani vyadarayat
nabhas caprthivim caiva tumulo vyanunadayan (1.19)

sah — that; ghosah — uproar; dhartarastranam — of the sons of Dhrtarastra;
hrdayani — hearts; vyadarayat - rent, shattered; nabhah — sky; ca — also;
prthivim — the earth; ca — also; eva - certainly, also; tumulah - tumultuous,
uproarious; abhyanunadayan — resounding.

The tumultuous uproar tore the hearts of the sons (people) of
Dhrtarashtra's assembly, filling the earth and sky with sound. (1.19)

ARJUNA WANTS TO EXAMINE THE ARMY
AGAINST WHOM HE IS ABOUT TO COMBAT

atha vyavasthitan drstva dhartarastran kapi-dhvajah
pravrtte sastra-sampate dhanur udyamya pandavah
hrsikesam tada vakyam idam aha mahi-pate (1.20-21)

atha - now, thereupon; vyavasthitan - situated, standing arrayed; drstva -
seeing, looking upon; dhartarastran — the sons of Dhrtarastra; kapi-dhvajah -
monkey-ensigned, he whose flag was marked with Hanuman; pravrtte — while
about to begin; sastra-sampate - discharge of weapons, in releasing his arrows;
dhanuh — bow; udyamya - having taken, taking up; pandavah — the son of
Pandu (Arjuna); hrsikesam — unto Lord Krsna; tada - then, at that time; vakyam

— words; idam - this, these; aha — said; mahi-pate — O Lord of the Earth.

Then, looking at the sons of Dhritarashtra standing ranged for battle, while
the discharge of missiles began, Arjuna, the son of Pandu, whose emblem
depicts Maruki (a monkey) , took up his bow and spoke these words to
Hrslkesa (Krsna), O Lord of Earth: (1.20-21)

arjuna uvaca

senayor ubhayor madhye ratham sthapaya me 'cyuta

yavad etan nirikse 'ham yod dhu-kaman avasthitan

kair may a saha yoddhavyam asmin rana-samudyame (1.22)

arjunah uvaca — Arjuna said; senayoh — of the armies; ubhayoh - of both;
madhye - in the middle, between; ratham - car, chariot; sthapaya — place; me —
my; acyuta - O Achyuta, O infallible one; yavat — while; etan — all these;
nirikse - beholding, may look upon; aham — I; yoddhu-kaman — desirous to
fight; avasthitan - standing, arrayed on the battlefield; kaih — with whom; maya

— by me; saha — together; yoddhavyam - must be fought; asmin — in this; rana-
samudyame - eve of battle, (rana: strife) in the attempt.

Arjuna said: O Acyuta (Immortal, Krsna), position my chariot between the
two armies, that I may just see those who stand here desirous to fight, to
know with whom I must combat in this act of war. (1.22)

yotsyamanan avekse 'ham ya ete 'tra samagatah
dhartarastrasya durbuddher yuddhe priya-cikirsavah (1.23)

yotsyamanan — those who will be fighting, with the object of fighting; avekse -
observe, to look upon; aham — I; yah — who; ete — those; atra — here;
samagatah — assembled; dhartarastrasya — for the son of Dhrtarastra;

durbuddheh - of the evil-minded; yuddhe - in battle, in the fight; priya — well;
cikirsavah — wishing.

I wish to look upon those who are assembled here, and are about to engage
in battle eager to service in conflict the evil-minded son of Dhritarashtra,
achieving what he regards as best. (1:23)

sanjaya uvaca
evam ukto hrsikeso gudakesena bharata
senayor ubhayor madhye sthapayitva rathottamam (1.24)

sanjayah uvaca — Sanjaya said; evam — thus; uktah — addressed; hrsikesah —
Lord Krsna; gudakesena — by Arjuna; bharata — O descendant of Bharata;
senayoh — of the armies; ubhayoh - of both; madhye — in the middle;
sthapayitva - placing, having stationed; ratha-uttamam — the best of chariots.

Sanjaya said: In response to Gudakesa's (Arjuna) request, O Bharata
(Dhrtardshtra), Hrslkesa stationed that finest among chariots between the
two armies. (1.24)

bhisma-drona-pramukhatah sarvesam ca mahi-ksitam
uvaca partha pasyaitan samavetan kurun iti (1.25)

bhisma — Grandfather Bhisma; drona — the teacher Drona; pramukhatah — in
front of; sarvesam - of all; ca - and, also; mahi-ksitam — rulers of the world;
uvaca — said; partha — O son of Prtha, Arjuna; pasya - behold, look at; etan -
those, all of them; samavetan - gathered, assembled; kurun - Kurus, the
members of the Kuru dynasty; iti — thus.

Confronting Bhisma and Drona and all the rulers of earth, he said: O
Partha (Arjuna), look at these assembled Kurus. (1.25)

tatrapasyat sthitan parthah pitrn atha pitamahan
acaryan matulan bhratrn putran pautran sakhims tatha (1.26)

tatra — there; apasyat - saw, he could see; sthitan - stationed, standing; parthah
- Partha (Arjuna); pitrn — fathers; atha — also; pitamahan — grandfathers;
acaryan — teachers; matulan — maternal uncles; bhratrn — brothers; putran —
sons; pautran — grandsons; sakhin — friends; tatha — too; svasuran — fathers-in-
law; suhrdah — friends; ca — also; eva — certainly; senayoh - in armies;
ubhayoh - (in) of both parties; api - also, including.

Then, the son of Partha (Arjuna) saw ranged there in both the armies
fathers (paternal uncles), grandfathers, teachers, maternal uncles, brothers,
sons, grandsons and comrades, father-in-laws and friends. (1.26)

ARJUNA 'S DESPONDENCY

svasuran suhrdas caiva nayor ubhayor api
tan samiksya sa kaunteyah sarvan bandhun avasthitan (1.27)
krpaya parayavisto visidann idam abravit (1.28a)

tan - these, all of them; samiksya - having seen, after seeing; sah — he;
kaunteyah — the son of Kunti (Arjuna); sarvan — all; bandhun — relatives;
avasthitan - standing, situated; krpaya — by compassion, or pity; paraya —
deep; avistah - filled, overwhelmed; visidan - sorrowfully, while lamenting;
idam — this; abravit — spoke.

When the son of Kunti (Arjuna) saw that all those standing there in the
ranks of the two armies were his kinsmen, he was overwhelmed with
deepest pity and consequently said in sorrow: (1:27 -28a)

arjuna uvaca

drstvemam sva-janam Krsna yuyutsum samupasthitam
sidanti mama gatrani mukham ca parisusyati
vepathus ca satire me roma-harsas ca jay ate (1.28b-29)

arjunah uvaca — Arjuna said; drstva - having seen, after seeing; imam — these;
sva janam — kinsmen; krsna — O Krsna; yuyutsum - eager to fight;
samupasthitam - arrayed, present; sidanti — are quivering, fail; mama — my;
gatrani — limbs of the body; mukham — mouth; ca — also; parisusyati — is
drying up, is parching; vepathuh - shivering, trembling of the body; ca -and,
also; sarire - in body; me — my; roma-harsah — standing of hair on end,
horripilation; ca - and, also; jayate — arise.

Arjuna said: Seeing these kinsmen, O Krsna, ranged, eager for combat, my
limbs fail, and my mouth is dried up, my body quivers and my hair stands
on end. (1.28b-29)

gandivam sramsate hastat tvak caiva paridahyate
na ca saknomy avasthatum bhramativa ca me manah (1.30)

gandivam - Gandiva, the bow of Arjuna; sramsate — slips; hastat — from (my)
hand; tvak - (my) skin; ca - and, also; eva - also, certainly; paridahyate — is
burning, burns all over; na - nor, not; ca - and, also; saknomi — am I able;
avasthatum — to stand; bhramati - forgetting, seems whirling, spiralling; iva —
as; ca — and; me — my; manah - mind.

The Gandlva (bow) slips from my hand, and my skin is terribly burning. I
am not able to stand, and my mind is spiralling as it were. (1.30)

nimittani ca pasyami viparitani Kesava
na ca sreyo 'nupasyami hatva sva-janam ahave (1.31)

nimittani - omens; ca — also; pasyami — I see; viparitani - adverse, just the
opposite; kesava — O killer of the demon Kesi (Krsna); na - not, nor; ca - and,
also; sreyah — good; anupasyami - see, do I foresee; hatva — killing; sva-janam

- our people, own kinsmen; ahave — in the fight, or battle.

I see opposing omens, O Kesava (Krsna), and do not see any good from
killing my kinsmen in battle. (1.31)

na kankse vijayam krsna na ca rajyam sukhani ca
kim no rajyena govinda kim bhogair jivitena va (1.32)

na - not, nor; kankse — I desire; vijayam — victory; krsna — O Krsna; na - not,
nor; ca - and, also; rajyam — kingdom; sukhani — pleasures; ca - and, also, kim

— what; nah — to us; rajyena - by kingdom; govinda — O Govinda (Krsna); kim

— what; bhogaih - by pleasures, amusements; jivitena — life; va - or, either

I do not wish victory, O Krsna, nor kingdoms or pleasures. What is the use
to us in having a kingdom, O Govinda (Krsna), or amusement and even life.
(1.32)

yesam arthe kanksitam no rajyam bhogah sukhani ca
ta ime 'vasthita yuddhe pranams tyaktva dhanani ca (1.33)

yesam — of whose; arthe — sake; kanksitam - (is) desired; nah — by us; rajyam -

- kingdom; bhogah — enjoyment; sukhani — pleasures; ca - and, also; te - they,
all of them; ime — these; avasthitah - stand, situated; yuddhe - in battle, on this
battlefield; pranan - life, lives; tyaktva - having abandoned; dhanani - wealth,
riches; ca - and.

Those for whose sake we desire kingdom, enjoyments and pleasures stand
here for battle, having abandoned life and wealth; (1.33)

acaryah pitarah putras tathaiva ca pitamahah
matulah svasurah pautrah syalah sambandhinas tatha (1.34)

acaryah — teachers; pitarah — fathers; putrah — sons; tatha - thus, as well as;
eva - also, certainly; ca - and, also; pitamahah — grandfathers; matulah —
maternal uncles; svasurah — fathers-in-law; pautrah — grandsons; syalah —
brothers-in-law; sambandhinah — relatives; tatha — as well as.

Teachers, fathers (paternal uncles), sons and grandfathers, maternal uncles,
fathers-in-law, grandsons, brothers-in-law and also (other) relatives. (1.34)

etan na hantum icchami ghnato 'pi madhusudana
api trailokya-rajyasya hetoh kim nu mahi-krte (1.35)

etan — these; na - not, never; hantum — to kill; icchami - wish, do I wish;
ghnatah - even being killed, being killed; api — even; madhusudana — O slayer
of the demon Madhu (Krsna); api — even if; trai-lokya — of the three worlds;
rajyasya - dominion, primacy,for the kingdom; hetoh - for the sake of; kim nu -
how then; mahi-krte — for the sake of the earth.

These, I do not want to kill, O Slayer of Madhusudana (Krsna), though they
want to kill us, even for the sake to obtain the primacy over the three
worlds; and much less for the sake of the earth! (1.35)

nihatya dhartarastran nah ka pritih syaj janardana
papam evasrayed asman hatvaitan atatayinah (1.36)

nihatya - on killing; dhartarastran — the sons of Dhrtarastra; nah - to us, our;
ka — what; pritih — pleasure; syat - may be, will there be; janardana — O
maintainer of the people; papam - sin, vices; eva - only, certainly; asrayet -
would take hold, must come upon; asman - to us; hatva - having killed, by
killing; etan — all these; atatayinah - felons, offenders, aggressors.

Killing these sons of Dhrtarashtra, what satisfaction can be ours, O
Janardana (Maintainer of the people, Krsna)? On killing these offenders only
sin will take hold of us. (1.36)

tasman narha vayam hantum dhartarastran sa-bandhavan
sva-janam hi katham hatva khinah syama Madhava (1.37)

tasmat — therefore; na - (are) not, never; arhah -justified, deserving; vayam —
we; hantum — to kill; dhartarastran — the sons of Dhrtarastra; sa-bandhavan -
our own kinsmen, relatives, along with friends; sva-janam — kinsmen; hi -
indeed, certainly; katham — how; hatva — by killing, having killed; sukhinah —

happy; syama - may (we) be, will we become; madhava — O Madhava (Krsna),
husband of the goddess of fortune.

It is not correct to kill our own kinsmen, the sons of Dhrtarashtra, indeed,
by killing our own people, how can we be happy, O Madhava (Krsna)?
(1:37)

yady apy ete na pasyanti lobhopahata-cetasah
kula-ksaya-krtam dosam mitra-drohe ca patakam (1.38)

yadyapi — though; ete - these, they; na — not; pasyanti — see; lobha — by greed;
upahata — overpowered; cetasah — their hearts; lobhopahata cetasah - with
intelligence overpowered by greed; kula-ksayakrtam - in the destruction of the
families, in killing the families; krtam — done; dosam - evil, fault; mitra-drohe -
in hostility to friends, in quarrelling with friends; ca - and, also; patakam - sin,
sinful reactions

katham najneyam asmabhih pad asman nivartitum
kula-ksaya-krtam dosam prapasyadbhir Janardana (1.39)

katham — why; na - not, should not; jneyam - should be learned; asmabhih — by
us; papat — from sins; asmat - these, this; nivartitum — to cease, to turn away;
kula-ksaya krtam — in the destruction of a family (dynasty); dosam - evil, crime;
prapasyadbhih - clearly seeing, by those who can set; janardana — O Janardana
(Krsna).

Although these, their minds overpowered by greediness, perceive no guilt in
the extinction of the family and no sin in treachery to friends, yet, O
Janardana (Krsna); why should we not learn to retreat from this sin,
perceiving the guilt in the destruction of the family? (1.38-39)

ARJUNA POSITIONS THE PROBLEMS OF WAR

kula-ksaye pranasyanti kula-dharmah sanatanah
dharme naste kulam krtsnam adharmo 'bhibhavaty uta (1.40)

kula-ksaye — in destroying the family, in the destruction of a family;
pranasyanti — perish; kula-dharmah — the family traditions, or family religious
observances/rites; sanatanah - eternal, immemorial; dharme - spirituality,
religion; naste — being destroyed; kulam — family; krtsnam - the whole;
adharmah - irreligion, impiety; abhibhavati - overcome, transforms; uta -
indeed, it is said.

In the annihilation of a family, the immemorial family traditions (dharmas)
are destroyed, and when these disappear, lawlessness overtakes the whole
family. (1.40)

adharmabhibhavat Krsna pradusyanti kula-striyah
sttisu dustasu varsneya jayate varna-sankarah (1.41)

adharma — irreligion; abhibhavat — having become predominant; adharma
abhibhavat - from the prevalence of impiety; krsna — O Krsna; pradusyanti —
become corrupt; kula-striyah - the women of the family; strisu - in women, by
the womanhood; dustasu — being so corrupt; varsneya — O descendant of
Varsneya (Krsna); jayate - arises, comes into being; varna-sankarah - caste
admixture, unwanted progeny, caste confusion.

When lawlessness prevails, O Krsna, the women of the family become
corrupted; and when women grow corrupt, O descendant of Varsneya
(Krsna), there will be caste -confusion; (1.41)

sankaro narakayaiva kula-ghnanam kulasya ca
patanti pitaro hy esam lupta-pindodaka-kriyah (1.42)

sankarah —confusion; narakaya - for the hell, make for hellish life; eva - also,
certainly; kula-ghnanam — for those who are killers (slayers) of the family;
kulasya — of the family; ca - and, also; patanti — fall; pitarah — forefathers; hi -
verily, certainly; esam - their, of them; lupta — stopped; pinda — of offerings of
food; udaka — and water; kriyah - performances; lupta pindodaka kriyah -
deprived of the offerings of rice -ball and water.

And, the confusion of castes leads the family and those who have destroyed
the families to hell. Their forefathers fall as well (to hell), deprived of their
ritual offerings of rice-balls and water. (1:42)

dosair etaih kula-ghnanam varna-sankara-karakaih
utsadyante jati-dharmah kula-dharmas ca sasvatah (1.43)

dosaih - by evil deeds, by such faults; etaih - (by) these; kula-ghnanam — of the
destroyers of the family; varna-sankara — of unwanted children; karakaih —
which are causes; Varnasankarakarakaih - causing intermingling of castes;
utsadyante - are destroyed, are devastated; jati dharmah - caste religious rites,
community projects; kula-dharmah — family traditions or rites (habits); ca -
and, also; sasvatah — eternal.

By these evil deeds of those destroying the family, causing the fusion of
castes (varna-samkara), the eternal family traditions are devastated. (1.43)

utsanna-kula-dharmanam manusyanam janardana
narake niyatam vaso bhavatity anususruma (1.44)

utsanna — spoiled; kula-dharmanam — of those who have the family traditions;
utsanna-kula-dharmanam - whose family religious practices are destroyed;
manusyanam — of the men; janardana - O Janardana (Krsna); narake — in hell;
niyatam - for unknown period; vasah - dwelling, residence; bhavati - is, it so
becomes; iti — thus; anususruma - we have heard.

We have heard, O Janardana (Krsna), that those whose family traditions
have been ruined dwell necessarily in hell. (1.44)

aho bata mahat papam kartum vyavasita vayam

yad rajya-sukha-lobhena hantum sva-janam udyatah (1.45)

aho bata — alas; mahat — great; papam — sins; kartum - to do, to perform;
vyavasitah — have decided, have determined, prepared; vayam — we; yat —
because; rajya-sukha-lobhena - by the greed of pleasure of kingdom, driven by
greed for royal happiness; hantum — to kill; sva-janam — kinsmen; udyatah —
prepared.

Alas! We have determined to commit a great sin, inasmuch as we are
attempting to kill our own kinsmen through greediness for the pleasures of
supremacy. (1:45)

yadi mam apratikaram asastram sastra-panayah
dhartarastra rane hanyus tan me ksemataram bhavet (1.46)

yadi — if; mam — me; apratikaram - unresisting, without being resistant;
asastram - unarmed, without being fully equipped; sastra-panayah - those with
weapons in hand; dhartarastrah — the sons of Dhrtarastra; rane — on the
battlefield; hanyuh - should slay; tat — that; me — of me; ksema-taram — better;
bhavet — would be.

It would be better for me, if the sons of Dhrtarashtra, weapons in hand,
were to slay me in combat, while being unarmed and unable to resist. (1.46)

sanjaya uvaca
evam uktvarjunah sankhye rathopastha upavisat
visrjya sa-saram capam soka-samvigna-manasah (1.47)

sanjayah uvaca — Sanjaya said; evam — thus; uktva - having said; arjunah —
Arjuna; sankhye — in the battle; ratha — of the chariot; upasthe — on the seat;
upavisat — sat down (again); visrjya - having cast away, putting aside; sa-saram
— arrows; capam — the bow; soka — by lamentation; samvigna — distressed;
manasah — within the mind; soka samvigna manasah - with a mind distressed
with sorrow .

Having spoken as such, Arjuna sank down on the seat of his chariot, casting
away his bow and arrow, his mind distracted with grief. (1.47)

In the Upanisad of the Bhagavadglta, the knowledge of Brahman the
Supreme, the science of yoga, and the dialogue between Srlkrsna and
Arjuna, this is the first discourse entitled, "The Hopelessness of Arjuna".

Second Discourse

Sankhya Theory and Yoga Practices
ARJUNA 'S WEAKNESS CONDEMNED BY SUPREME LORD

sanjaya uvaca
tarn tatha krpayavistam asru-purnakuleksanam
visidantam idam vakyam uvaca madhusudanah (2.01)

sanjayah uvaca — Sanjaya said; tarn - to him, unto Arjuna; tatha — thus; krpaya
- with pity, by compassion; avistam - overcome, overwhelmed; asru-purna-
akula iksanam - with eyes full of tears; visidantam - despondent, lamenting;
idam - this, these; vakyam - speech, words; uvaca - spoke, said; madhu-
sudanah - Madhusudana, the destroyer of Madhu (Krsna).

Sanjaya said: To him who was in this way overwhelmed with compassion
and affliction, whose eyes were distraught and filled with tears, Madhava
(Krsna, the destroyer of Madhu), spoke these words: (2:01)

sri-bhagavan uvaca
kutas tva kasmalam idam visame samupasthitam
anarya-justam asvargyam akirti-karam Arjuna (2.02)

sri-bhagavan uvaca — the Supreme Lord said; kutah - whence, wherefrom; tva
- upon you, unto you; kasmalam — dejection; idam — this; visame - in perilous
strait, in this hour of crisis; samupasthitam - comes, arrived; anarya — persons
who do not know the value of life; justam — practiced by; anaryajustam -
unworthy (unary anlike); asvargyam — which does not lead to higher realms,
spheres, heaven excluding; akirti — infamy; akirti — the cause of; akirtiakirti -
disgraceful; arjuna — O Arjuna.

The Supreme Lord said: From where has this dejection come into your
mind in this perilous hour? This is unknown to an Aryan, not leading to
heaven but causing disgrace, O Arjuna. (2.02)

klaibyam ma sma gamah Partha naitat tvayy upapadyate
ksudram hrdaya-daurbalyam tyaktvottistha Parantapa (2.03)

klaibyam — impotence; ma sma — do not; gamah — take to; ma sma gamah - do
not get; partha — O son of Prtha (Arjuna); na - not, never; etat — this; tvayi - in
you, unto you; upadyate - is, fitting, is befitting; ksudram - mean, petty; hrdaya
- of the heart; daurbalyam — weakness; tyaktva - having abandoned, giving up;
uttistha - stand up, get up; param-tapa — O scorcher of foes (Arjuna).

O Partha (Arjuna), yield not to unmanliness: it does not befit you. Cast off
this vile faintheartedness and arise, Parantapa (Arjuna - Conqueror of foes).
(2:03)

ARJUNA SEEKS INSTRUCTION FROM THE SUPREME LORD

arjuna uvaca
katham bhismam aham sankhye dronam ca madhusudana
isubhih pratiyotsyami pujarhav ari-sudana (2.4)

arjunah uvaca — Arjuna said; katham — how; bhismam — Bhisma; aham — I;
sankhye - in battle, in the fight; dronam — Drona; ca - and, also; madhu-sudana
- O Madhusudana, O killer of Madhu (Krsna); isubhih — with arrows;
pratiyotsyami — shall attack, fight; puja-arhau — those who are worthy of
respect, worthy to be worshipped; ari-sudana — O slayer of the enemies (Krsna).

Arjuna said: O Madhava (Krsna), how shall I attack with arrows in combat
Bhisma and Drona, for they are worthy of respect, O Arisudana (O slayer of
foes, Krsna)! (2.04)

gurun ahatva hi mahanubhavan sreyo bhoktum bhaiksyam apiha loke
hatvartha-kamams tu gurun ihaiva bhunjiya bhogan rudhira-pradigdhan
(2.05)

gurun - the gurus (teachers); ahatva - instead of killing/slaying, not killing; hi -
indeed, certainly; maha-anubhavan - most noble, of high honour, great souls;
sreyah — it is better; bhoktum — to enjoy wealth, or life, also 'to eat'; bhaiksyam
- alms, by begging; api — even; iha — here; loke — in this world; hatva - having
slain, killing; artha — gain; kaman — desiring ;arthakaman - wealth and desires;
tu - indeed, but; gurun — gurus; iha — here; eva - also, certainly; bhunjiya -
enjoy, one has to enjoy; bhogan - enjoyments, enjoyable things; rudhira —
blood; pradigdhan — tainted with; rudhira pradigdhan - stained with blood.

For better were it here in this world to eat a beggar's food rather than by
killing these teachers of high honour. However, were I to kill them, I should
only enjoy wealth and worldly pleasures tainted with blood. (2.05)

na caitad vidmah kataran no gariyo yad va jayema yadi va no jayeyuh
yan eva hatva na jijivisamas te 'vasthitah pramukhe dhartarastrah (2.06)

na - not, nor; ca - and, also; etat — this; vidmah - (do we) know; katarat —
which; nah — for us; gariyah — better; yat — that; va - or; yatva — whether;
jayema — we should conquer; yadi — if; va — or; nah — us; jayeyuh — they
should conquer; yan - whom, those who; eva - even, certainly; hatva - having
slain or killed, by killing; na - not, never; jijivisamah - we wish to love, we
would want to live; te - those, all of them; avasthitah - (are) standing or
situated; pramukhe - in face, in the front; dhartarastrah — the sons of
Dhrtarastra.

We do not know which is the better alternative for us, to conquer them or
they conquer us. There facing us stand Dhrtarustra's sons, whom having
killed, we should not even care to live. (2:06)

karpanya-dosopahata-svabhavah prcchami tvam dharma-sammudha-
cetah
yac chreyah syan niscitam bruhi tan me sisyas te 'ham sadhi mam tvam
prapannam (2.07)

karpanya — of miserliness; dosa — by the weakness; upahata — being afflicted;
sva-bhavah — characteristics; karpanya-dosopahata-svabhavah - with nature
overpowered by the taint of pity; prcchami - 1 ask, I am asking; tvam - you,
unto You; dharma — religion; sammudha — bewildered; cetah — in heart;
dharma-sammudha-cetah - with a mind in confusion about duty; yat - which,
what; sreyah - good, all-good; syat — may be; niscitam — decisively; bruhi -
say, tell; tat — that; me - for me, unto me; sisyah — disciple; te - you, your;
aham — I am; sadhi - teach, instruct; mam — me; tvam — unto You; prapannam
- surrendered, taking refuge.

My very being (svathdva) is stained by the harmful taint of feeble pity, and
my mind confounded about right and wrong (Dharma, Brahman who
supports all). I ask you; tell me what is absolutely good. I am Your disciple,
having surrounded myself to You, teach me for all my trust is in You. (2.07)

na hi prapasyami mamapanudyad yac chokam ucchosanam indriyanam
avapya bhumav asapatnam rddham rajyam suranam api cadhipatyam (2.08)

na hi - not, do not; prapasyami — I see; mama — my; apanudyat - would
remove, can drive away; yat — that which; sokam - grief, lamentation;
ucchosanam — drying up; indriyanam — of the (my) senses; avapya - achieving,
having obtained; bhumau — on the earth; asapatnam — without rival, unrivalled;
rddham — prosperous; rajyam - dominion, kingdom; suranam — of the
demigods, over the gods; api — even; ca - and, also; adhipatyam - supremacy,
lordship.

I see no means to dispel the sorrow which parches my senses, even after
attaining unrivalled and prosperous kingdom on earth or even lordship
over the gods themselves. (2:08)

sanjaya uvaca
evam uktva hrsikesam gudakesah parantapah
na yotsya iti govindam uktva tusnim babhuva ha (2.09)

sanjayah uvaca — Sanjaya said; evam — thus; uktva - having spoken, speaking;
hrsikesam — unto Krsna; gudakesah — Arjuna, the conqueror of sleep, Arjuna,
the master of curbing ignorance; parantapah — the chastiser of the enemies, the
scorcher of foes; na yotsye — I will not fight; iti — thus; govindam — Krsna;
uktva - saying, having said; tusnim — silent; babhuva ha — became.

Sanjaya said: Having spoken like this to Hrsikesa (Krsna), the powerful
Gudakesa, scorcher of the foe (Arjuna), fall silent, saying to Govinda
(Krsna): 'I will not fight' and he held his peace. (2.09)

tarn uvaca hrsikesah prahasann iva bharata
senayor ubhayor madhye visidantam idam vacah (2.10)

tarn — to him; uvaca - spoke, said; hrsikesah — Krsna; prahasan — smiling; iva
- as it were, like that; bharata — Arjuna, descendant of Bharata; senayoh — of
the armies; ubhayoh — of both parties; madhye - between, in the middle;
visidantam - despondent, unto the lamenting one; idam — this; vacah — words.

To him who was grieving, sitting amidst of the two armies, O Bharata
(Arjuna), Hrsikesa (Krsna) smiling as it were, spoke these words: (2.10)

SELF-KNOWLEDGE ALONE ELIMINATES UNHAPPINESS

sri-bhagavan uvaca
asocyan anvasocas tvam prajna-vadams ca bhasase
gatasun agatasums ca nanusocanti panditah (2.11)

sri-bhagavan uvaca — the Supreme Lord (Sri Bhaqgavan) said; asocyan - those
who should not be grieved for, not worthy of lamentation; anvasocah - has
grieved, you are lamenting; tvam — you; prajna-vadan - words of wisdom
(knowledge), learned talks; ca - and, also; bhasase — speaking; gata - the lost;
gatasun — the dead; asun — life; agata — not past; asun — life; agatsun — the
living; ca — also; na — never; anusocanti - grieve not, lament; panditah — the
learned, the wise.

The Supreme Lord said: You mourn for those who deserve no grief, and yet
you speak words of wisdom. For the living or the dead wise men know no
grief. (2.11)

na tv evaham jatu nasam na tvam neme janadhipah
na caiva na bhavisyamah sarve vayam atah param (2.12)

na - not, never; tu - but, indeed; eva - also, certainly; aham — I; jatu — at any
time; na — did not; asam — exist; na — not; tvam — you; na — not; ime — all
these; jana-adhipah - rulers of men, kings; na — never; ca - and, also; eva -
also, certainly; na — not; bhavisyamah - shall be, shall exist; sarve - all; vayam
- we; sarve vayam — all of us; atah param - after, hereafter.

Never did I not exist, nor you, nor these rulers of men; nor will there be a
time in the future when we shall cease to exist. (2.12)

dehino 'smin yatha dehe kaumaram yauvanam jara
tatha dehantara-praptir dhiras tatra na muhyati (2.13)

dehinah — of the embodied (soul); asmin — in this; yatha — as; dehe — in (the)
body; kaumaram - boyhood, childhood; yauvanam — youth; jara — old age;
tatha - so also, similarly; deha-antarapraptih - the attainment of another body,
of transference of the body; praptih — achievement; dhirah — the firm; tatra -
thereupon, thereat; na - not, never; muhyati — grieves.

Just as in this bodily form the Self (Soul) experiences childhood, youth and
old age, so does it pass into another body (after death). In this, a thoughtful
man has no doubts. (See also 15.08) (2.13)

matra-sparsas tu Kaunteya sitosna-sukha-duhkha-dah
agamapayino 'nityas tams titiksasva Bharata (2.14)

matra-sparsah - contacts of senses with objects, sensory perception; tu - only,
indeed; kaunteya — O son of Kunti, O Kaunteya (Arjuna); sita — winter; usna —
summer; sukha — happiness; duhkha — and pain; sitosna sukha duhkhadah -
producers of cold and heat, pleasure and pain; dah — giving; agama —
appearing; apayinah — disappearing; agamapayinah - with beginning and end;
anityah - impermanent; tan - them, all of them; titiksasva — just try to tolerate,
bear you ...; bharata — O descendant of the Bharata dynasty, O Bharata
(Arjuna).

The sense-contacts, O son of Kunti (Arjuna), which give rise to heat and
cold, pleasure and pain, come and go, they are impermanent. Learn to
endure them, O Bharata (Arjuna). (2.14)

yam hi na vyathayanty ete purusam purusarsabha
sama-duhkha-sukham dhiram so 'mrtatvaya kalpate (2.15)

yam - whom, one to whom; hi - surely, certainly; na — never; vyathayanti — are
distressing; na vyathayanti - afflict not; ete — these; purusam - man, to a
person; purusa-rsabha — O best among men; O chief among men; sama —
unaltered; duhkha — in distress; sukham — and happiness; sama duhkha sukkham
- same in pleasure and pain; dhiram — firm; sah — he; amrtatvaya - for
immortality, for liberation; kalpate — is considered eligible, is fit.

It is the wise man who is not afflicted by them, who remains undaunted in
pain and pleasure, who becomes fit to attain immortality, O chief among

men (Arjuna). (2.15)

THE REAL AND THE UNREAL

nasato vidyate bhavo nabhavo vidyate satah

ubhayor api drsto 'ntas tv anayos tattva-darsibhih (2.16)

na - not, never; asatah - of the unreal, of the nonexistent, none being; vidyate -
is, there is; bhavah - being, endurance; na - not, never; abhavah — changing
quality; vidyate - is, there is; satah - of the real, of the eternal; ubhayoh — of the
two; api - also, verily; drstah - seen (has been) observed; antah - the final truth,
conclusion; tu — indeed; anayoh - of these, of them; tattva — of the truth;
darsibhih — by the seers; tattvadarsibhih - by the knowers of the truth, by the
seers of the essence of things.

That which is unreal has no becoming, while the real never ceases to be.
Both these have been perceived by the seers of the essence of things (Tattva).
(2.16)

avinasi tu tad viddhi yena sarvam idam tatam
vinasam avyayasyasya na kascit kartum arhati (2.17)

avinasi - indestructible, imperishable; tu - indeed, but; tat — that; viddhi —
know (it); yena — by whom; sarvam - all; idam — this; tatam - is pervaded;
vinasam — destruction; avyayasya — of the imperishable; asya — of it; na - not;
na kascit — no one; kartum — to do; arhati — is able.

But know "That" (Brahman - Tat tvam asi) is indestructible by which the
whole (universe) is pervaded. None can bring destruction of That, the
Immutable. (2.17)

antavanta ime deha nityasyoktah saririnah
anasino prameyasya tasmad yudhyasva Bharata (2.18)

anta-vantah - perishable, having an end; ime — these; dehah - (material) bodies;
nityasya - of the everlasting, eternal in existence; uktah — are said; saririnah —
of the embodied soul; anasinah — never to be destroyed, of the indestructible;
aprameyasya - of the immeasurable; tasmat — therefore; yudhyasva — fight;
bharata — O descendant of Bharata (Arjuna).

It is said, that these (our) bodies, indwelt by the Eternal embodied (Soul, the
Self) who is eternal, indestructible and unknowable, are finite. Therefore,
fight, O Bharata (Arjuna). (2.18)

ya enam vetti hantaram yas cainam manyate hatam
ubhau tau na vijanito nayam hanti na hanyate (2.19)

yah - he who, anyone who; enam - this (self); vetti — knows; hantaram - the
slayer, the killer; yah - he who, anyone who; ca - and, also; enam — this;
manyate — thinks; hatam - slain, killed; ubhau — both; tau - those, they; na -
not, never; vijanitah - know, are in knowledge; na - not, never; ay am — this;
hanti - slays, kills; na - not, nor; hanyate - is slain, is killed.

He who regards that He (the embodied soul) can be a slayer and he who
thinks he is slain, both of them are ignorant. He slays not, nor is he slain. (A
parallel verse is read in KaU 2.19) (2.19)

na jay ate mriyate va kadacin nayam bhutva bhavita va na bhuyah
ajo nityah sasvato 'yam purano na hanyate hanyamane sarire (2.20)

na - not, never; jay ate - is born, takes birth; mriyate — dies; va - or, either;
kadacit — at any time (past, present or future); na - not, never; ay am — this;
bhutva — having come into being; bhavita — will come to be; va — or; na — not;
bhuyah - (any) more, or is again coming to be; ajah — unborn; nityah — eternal;
sasvatah - changeless, permanent; ay am — this; puranah - ancient, the oldest;
na - not, never; hanyate - is killed; hanyamane — being killed; sarire - in the
body.

He is not born, nor does He ever die. Never did He come to be, nor will he
ever come to be again. Unborn, eternal, immutable and primeval, He is not
slain when the body is slain. (See also KaU 2.18) (2.20)

vedavinasinam nityam ya enam ajam avyayam
katham sa purusah Partha kam ghatayati hanti kam (2.21)

veda — knows; avinasinam — indestructible; nityam - eternal, always existing;
yah - who, one who; enam — this (soul, self); ajam — unborn; avyayam -
inexhaustible, immutable; katham — how; sah - he (that); purusah - man,
person; partha — O Partha (Arjuna); kam — whom; ghatayati — causes to hurt,
slain; hanti — kills; kam — whom.

The one who knows Him to be indestructible, eternal, unborn and
immutable, how can that man slay, or cause to be slain, O Partha (Arjuna)!
(2.21)

HOW THE SELF IS INDESTRUCTIBLE

vasamsi jirnani yatha vihaya navani grhnati naro 'parani
tatha sarirani vihaya jirnany anyani samyati navani dehi (2.22)

vasamsi - clothes, garments; jirnani — old and worn out; yatha — just as; vihaya
- having cast away, giving up; navani — new (garments, clothes); grhnati -
takes, does accept; narah — a man; aparani — others; tatha - so, in the same
way; sarirani — bodies; vihaya — giving up, having cast away; jirnani — old and
useless, worn out; anyani - others, different; samyati —enters; navani — new;
dehi — the embodied (one).

Just as a man casts off his worn-out clothes, and puts on other new ones, so
the embodied (Soul, Self) casts off his worn-out bodies and enters others,
new ones. (2.22)

nainam chindanti sastrani nainam dahati pavakah
na cainam kledayanty apo na sosayati marutah (2.23)

na - not, never; enam — this (self); chindanti — cut; sastrani — weapons; na -
not, never; enam — this; dahati — burns; pavakah — fire; na — never; ca - and,
also; enam — this; kledayanti - wet, moistens; apah — waters; na - not, never;
sosayati — dries; marutah — wind.

He (the embodied soul) cannot be cut by weapons, nor burnt by fire, nor
waters wet him, nor the wind dry him up. (2.23)

acchedyo 'yam adahyo 'yam akledyo 'sosya eva ca
nityah sarva-gatah sthanur acalo 'yam sanatanah (2.24)

acchedyah - unbreakable, cannot be cut; ayam — this self; adahyah -
unable/cannot to be burned; ayam — this; akledyah - cannot be wetted,
insoluble; asosyah - cannot be dried; eva - also, certainly; ca — and; nityah -
eternal, everlasting; sarva-gatah — all-pervading; sthanuh - unchangeable,
stable; acalah — immovable; ayam — this; sanatanah — eternally the same,
ancient.

He is uncleavable, unburnable, unwettable, and undryable. He is
everlasting, all-pervading, stable, firm, and everlasting. (2.24)

avyakto 'yam acintyo 'yam avikaryo 'yam ucyate
tasmad evam viditvainam nanusocitum arhasi (2.25)

avyaktah - unmanifested, invisible; ayam - this (self); acintyah - unthinkable,
inconceivable; ayam — this avikaryah — unchangeable; ayam — this; ucyate — is
said; tasmat — therefore; evam - thus, like this; viditva - having known; enam —
this; na — not; anusocitum — to lament, to grieve; arhasi - you ought, you
deserve.

It is said, that He is unmanifest, unthinkable and unchanging. Therefore,
knowing He to be so, put away your useless sadness. (2.25)

atha cainam nitya-jatam nityam va manyase mrtam
tathapi tvam maha-baho nainam socitum arhasi (2.26)

atha - if , however; ca - and, also; enam — this (self); nitya-jatam - always,
constantly born; nityam - constantly, forever; va - or, either; manyase - think,
you so think; mrtam — dead; tatha api - even then, still; tvam — you; maha-baho
- mighty armed, O mighty-armed one (Arjuna); na - not, never; enam — this;
socitum — to grieve; arhasi - ought, should.

Even if you believe He is constantly born and constantly dies, even so, O
mighty-armed (Arjuna), you should not mourn. (2.26)

jatasya hi dhruvo mrtyur dhruvam janma mrtasya ca
tasmad apariharye 'rthe na tvam socitum arhasi (2.27)

jatasya - of the born, of one who has taken his birth; hi - for; dhruvah - certain,
a fact; mrtyuh — death; dhruvam - certain, it is also a fact; janma — birth;
mrtasya — of the dead; ca - and, also; tasmat — therefore; apariharye -
inevitable, of that which is unavoidable; arthe — in the matter; na - not, do not;
tvam — you; socitum — to lament, to grieve; arhasi - ought, should.

To that which is born, death is certain; and to one that dies, birth is certain.
Therefore, this being unavoidable, you have no cause to mourn. (2.27)

avyaktadini bhutani vyakta-madhyani bharata
avyakta-nidhanany eva tatra ka paridevana (2.28)

avyakta-adini — unmanifested in the beginning; bhutani - being, all that are
created; vyakta — manifested; madhyani — in the middle; vyakta madhyani -
manifested in their middle state; bharata — O descendant of Bharata (Arjuna);
avyakta - non-manifested; nidhanani — when vanquished; avyakta nidhanani -
unmanifested again in the end; eva - also, it is all like that; tatra — there; ka —
what; paridevana - lamentation, grief.

O Bharata (Arjuna), unseen are the beginnings of beings, their middle
course seen, and their end unseen again. So, what is there to mourn over?
(2.28)

THE TRUE SELF (SOUL) CAN NEVER BE SLAIN

ascarya-vat pasyati kascid enam ascarya-vad vadati tathaiva canyah.
ascarya-vac cainam anyah srnoti srutvapy enam veda na caiva kascit (2.29)

ascarya-vat — as amazing, as a wonder; pasyati — sees; kascit — someone; enam
— this (self); ascarya-vat — as amazing, as a wonder; vadati — speaks of; tatha -
so, thus; eva - also, certainly; ca - and, also; anyah — another; ascarya-vat —
similarly amazing, as a wonder; ca - and, also; enam — this; anyah — another;
srnoti — hears of; srutva — having heard; api — even; enam — this; veda —
knows; na - not, never; ca — and; eva - also, certainly; kascit - someone,
anyone.

As a rare privilege may someone see Him, and also by rare privilege may
another speak of Him, and as a rare privilege may still another hear Him.
But even after all this, none understands Him at all. (See also KaU 2.07)
(2.29)

dehi nityam avadhyo 'yam dehe sarvasya bharata
tasmat sarvani bhutani na tvam socitum arhasi (2.30)

dehi - indweller, the embodied, the owner of the material body; nityam -always,
eternally; avadhyah - indestructible, cannot be killed; ay am — this; dehe — in the
body; sarvasya — of everyone, of all; bharata — O descendant of Bharata
(Arjuna); tasmat — therefore; sarvani - (for) all; bhutani - creatures, living
entities (that are born); na — never; tvam — you; socitum — to lament, to grieve;
arhasi - you should.

He, the embodied (Soul, Self) in every one's body can never be slain, O
Bharata (Arjuna). Therefore, it is not proper for you to mourn about any
creature. (2.30)

A WARRIOR SHOULD FIGHT

sva-dharmam api caveksya na vikampitum arhasi
dharmyad dhi yuddhac chreyo 'nyat ksatriyasya na vidyate (2.31)

sva-dharmam — one's own duty; api — also; ca - and, indeed; aveksya - looking
at, considering; na - not, never; vikampitum - to waver, to hesitate; arhasi —
you ought, should; dharmyat - than righteous; hi — indeed; yuddhat — than
fighting, than war; sreyah - higher, better engagement; anyat — other;
ksatriyasya — of the ksatriya; na - not, does not; vidyate - exist, is.

Considering your own (caste) duty (dharma), you should not hesitate. For
there is nothing more meritorious for a Ksatriya that a dutiful war. (2.31)

yadrcchaya copapannam svarga-dvaram apavrtam
sukhinah ksatriyah Partha labhante yuddham idrsam (2.32)

yadrcchaya - of itself, by its own accord; ca - and, also; upapannam - come,
arrived at; svarga — of the heavenly spheres; svargadvaram - the gate of
heaven; dvaram — door; apavrtam - opened, wide open; sukhinah — happy;
ksatriyah - Ksatriyas, the members of the royal order; partha — O son of Prtha
(Arjuna); labhante - obtain, do achieve; yuddham - battle, war; idrsam — like
this, such.

Providential for those Ksatriyas, O Partha, becoming involved in a war like
this, presented by pure chance, like an open door to heaven. (2.32)

atha cet tvam imam dharmyam sangramam na karisyasi
tatah sva-dharmam kirtim ca hitva papam avapsyasi (2.33)

atha — therefore; cet — if; athacet - but if; tvam — you; /mam — this; dharmyam
— righteous; sangramam - warfare, fighting; na - not, do not; karisyasi - will
do, perform; tatah — then; svadharmam - own duty; kirtim - fame, reputation;
ca - and, also; hitva - having abandoned, losing; papain - sin, sinful reaction;
avapsyasi - shall incur, will gain.

But if you will not fight this righteous battle, then, abandoning your own
duty (dharma) and honour, you will incur sin. (2.33)

akirtim capi bhutani kathayisyanti te 'vyayam
sambhavitasya cakirtir maranad atiricyate (2.34)

akirtim - dishonour, infamy; ca - and, also; api - also; bhutani - beings, all
people; kathayisyanti - tell, will speak; te - you, of you; avyayam - everlasting,
forever; sambhavitasya -of the honoured, for a respectable man; ca — also;
akirtih - dishonour, ill fame; maranat — than death; atiricyate - exceeds,
becomes more

People also will always relate your dishonour; and, to one who has been
highly honoured, dishonour is more than death. (2.34)

bhayad ranad uparatam mamsyante tvam maha-rathah
yesam ca tvam bahu-mato bhutva yasyasi laghavam (2.35)

bhayat - from fear, out of fear; ranat — from the battle(field); uparatam -
withdrawn, ceased; mamsyante - will think, they will consider; tvam — you;
maha-rathah — the great generals, the great car-warriors; yesam - of whom; ca -
and, also; tvam — you; bahu-matah - much thought of, in great estimation;
bhutva — having been; yasyasi - will receive; laghavam - lightness, decreased
in value.

The great chariot-warriors will think that fear withdrew you from the
battle; and, though greatly honoured by them before, you will incur their
contempt. (2.35)

avacya-vadams ca bahun vadisyanti tavahitah
nindantas tava samarthyam tato duhkhataram nu kim (2.36)

avacya — unkind; vadan — fabricated words; avacyavadan - words that are
improper to be spoken; ca - and, also; bahun — many; vadisyanti — will say;
tava — your; ahitah — enemies; nindantah - cavilling, while vilifying; tava —
your; samarthyam -power, ability; tatah — than that, than this; duhkha-taram —
more painful; nu - indeed, of course, obviously; kim — what is there, what.

Your enemies, also, scorning your strength, will talk many abusive words.
Can there be anything more painful than that? (2.36)

hato va prapsyasi svargam jitva va bhoksyase mahim
tasmad uttistha Kaunteya yuddhaya krta-niscayah (2.37)

hatah - slain, being killed; va - or, either; prapsyasi - (you) will obtain, you
gain; svargam - heaven, the heavenly kingdom; jitva - having conquered, by
conquering; va — or; bhoksyase - you will enjoy, you enjoy; mahim - the earth,
the world; tasmat — therefore; uttistha - stand up, get up; kaunteya — O son of
Kunti, Arjuna; yuddhaya - for, to fight; krta — determined; niscayah — in
certainty; krta niscayah-- resolved.

Killed, you will attain heaven; victorious, you will enjoy the earth.
Therefore, O son of Kunti (O Kaunteya, Arjuna), arise, determined to fight.

(2.37)

sukha-duhkhe same krtva labhalabhau jayajayau
tato yuddhaya yujyasva naivam papam avapsyasi (2.38)

sukha - in pleasure, happiness; duhkhe - and in pain, and distress; same - same,
identical, equal, in equanimity; krtva - having made, doing so; labha-alabhau -
gain and loss, both profit and loss; jaya-ajayau — both victory and defeat; tatah
- then, thereafter; yuddhaya - for battle, for the sake of fighting; yujyasva -
prepare yourself to, engage (fight); na - not, never; evam - thus, in this way;
papam - sin, sinful reaction; avapsyasi - shall incur, you will gain.

Take as equal pleasure and pain, gain and loss, victory and defeat; prepare
yourself for battle (your duty). In so doing you will bring no evil to yourself.
(2.38)

KARMA YOGA AND SELFLESS ACTION A SAFE OPTION

esa te 'bhihita sankhye buddhir yoge tv imam srnu
buddhya yukto yaya Partha karma-bandham prahasyasi (2.39)

esa - this, all this; te — unto you; abhihita - declared, described; sankhye — by
analytical study, in Samkhya; buddhih - intelligence, wisdom; yoge - in the
yoga, in work without fruitive result; tu - indeed, but; imam — this; srnu- (just)
hear; buddhya — by intelligence, with wisdom; yuktah — induced; yaya — which;
partha — O son of Prtha, Arjuna; karma-bandham — bondage of reaction,
bondage of karma; prahasyasi — you can be released, you shall cast off.

This, the wisdom that has been taught to you is Sankhya (knowledge). Now
listen to the wisdom of Karma-yoga, which possessing, O Partha (Arjuna),
you shall cast off the bondage of action. (2.39)

nehabhikrama-naso 'sti pratyavayo na vidyate
sv-alpam apy asya dharmasya trayate mahato bhayat (2.40)

na - not, there is not; iha — in this yoga; abhikrama — in endeavoring; nasah —
loss; abhikramanasah - loss of effort; asti - is, there is; pratyavayah -
production of contrary results, diminution; na - not, never; vidyate - is, there is;
svalpam - very little, a little; api - even, although; asya — of this; dharmasya -
duty, occupation; trayate - protects, releases; mahatah - (from) (very) great;
bhayat - fear.

In this there is no loss of effort, or even harm. Even a little of this discipline
(dharma) protects one from great fear. (2.40)

vyavasayatmika buddhir ekeha kuru-nandana
bahu-sakha hy anantas ca buddhayo 'vyavasayinam (2.41)

vyavasaya-atmika - resolute, one-pointed; buddhih - will, determination; eka -
single, only one; iha - here (in this world); kuru-nandana - O joy of the Kurus,
Arjuna; bahu-sakhah - many-branched, having various branches; hi — indeed;
anantah - endless, unlimited; ca - and, also; buddhayah - thoughts, intelligent
thinking; avyavasayinam — of the resolute.

Here, O Son of Kuru (Arjuna), the essence of the soul (buddhi) is will
(vyavasdya). Many-branched and endless are the indecisive devoid of will.
(2.41)

NO WISDOM POSSIBLE FOR THE WORLDLY MINDED

yam imam puspitam vacam pravadanty avipascitah
veda-vada-ratah Partha nanyad astiti vadinah (2.42)

yam - which; imam — this; puspitam — flowery; vacam - speech, words;
pravadanti - utter, say; avipascitah - the unwise, men with limited knowledge;
veda-vada-ratah — supposed followers of the Vedas, taking pleasure in the
eulogising words of the Vedas; partha — O son of Prtha Arjuna; na - not, never;
anyat - other, anything else; asti - is, there is; iti — thus; vadinah — saying.

There are those who have no vision, whose minds are seduced by ornate
words, rejoicing in the letter of the Vedas, O Partha (Arjuna), and they say:
'There is nothing but this.' (2.42)

kamatmanah svarga-para janma-karma-phala-pradam
kriya-visesa-bahulam bhogaisvarya-gatim prati (2.43)

kama-atmanah - full of desires, desirous of sense gratification; svarga-parah —
aiming to achieve heavenly realms, with heaven as their highest goal; janma-
karma-phala-pradam -leading to (new) birth as the result of their works; kriya-
visesa bahulam - exuberant with various specific actions; kriya-visesa -
pompous ceremonies; bahulam — various; bhogaisvarya gatim prati - for the
attainment of pleasure and lordship; bhoga — in sense enjoyment; aisvarya —
and opulence; gatim — progress; prati - towards.

They are wrapped with selfish desires, and regard the attainment of heaven
as their highest goal. They hold to specific rites whose fruit is rebirth, and
the attainment of pleasure and power. (See also KaU 2.05, IsU 09) (2.43)

bhogaisvarya-prasaktanam ta yapahrta-cetasam
vyavasayatmika buddhih samadhau na vidhiyate (2.44)

bhogaaisvarya prasaktanam - of the people deeply attached to pleasure and
power (lordship); bhoga — to material enjoyment; aisvarya — and opulence;
prasaktanam — for those who are attached; toy a - by that, by such things;
apahrta-cetasam - whose minds are drawn away, bewildered in mind;
vyavasaya-atmika - determinate, fixed in determination; buddhih — reason;
samadhau — in Samadhi (sam 'together', adhi 'superior', individual merging
with the Absolute), in the controlled mind; na - not, never; vidhiyate - is fixed,
does take place.

For them who are attached to pleasure and power, and whose minds are
carried away by such teaching, they have not the determination ever to
attain Samadhi (the third state of consciousness in meditation). (2.44)

trai-gunya-visaya veda nistrai-gunyo bhavarjuna
nirdvandvo nitya-sattva-stho niryoga-ksema atmavan (2.45)

trai-gunya visayah - deal with the three attributes, pertaining to the three modes
of material nature; visayah — on the subject matter; vedah - Vedas, Vedic
literatures; nistrai-gunyah - without these three attributes (gunas); bhava — be;
arjuna — O Arjuna; nirdvandvah - free from the pairs of opposite, without
duality; nitya-sattva-sthah - ever remaining in the Sattva (goodness), a nice

thought: 'in a pure state of spiritual existence'; niryoga-ksemah - free from (the
thought of) acquisition and preservation; atma-van — established in the self

The Vedas cover the three Gunas of Nature. Be, O Arjuna, above the three
Gunas, free from pairs of opposites (dualities), unconcerned with
acquisition and preservation, always firm in goodness, and centred in the
Self. (2.45)

yavan artha udapane sarvatah samplutodake
tavan sarvesu vedesu brahmanasya vijanatah (2.46)

yavan - as much, all that; arthah — use; uda-pane - in a reservoir, in a well of
water; sarvatah — everywhere; sampluta-udake -being flooded; tavan - so much
(use); sarvesu — in all; vedesu - in the Vedas; brahmanasya - of the Brahmana (
a member of the priest cast, the higher order of the varnashrama system);
vijanatah - of the knowing, who is in complete knowledge.

Just as a reservoir is of little use by the side of an all -spreading flood of
water, the same there is in all Vedas for an enlightened Brahmana. (2.46)

THEORY AND PRACTICE OF KARMA YOGA

karmany evadhikaras te ma phalesu kadacana
ma karma-phala-hetur bhur ma te sango 'stv akarmani (2.47)

karmani - in work, in prescribed duties; eva - only, certainly; adhikarah —
right; te - you, of you; ma - not, never; phalesu — in the fruits; kadacana — at
any time; ma - not, never; karma-phala hetuh bhuh — let not the fruits of action
be the motive; karma-phala — in the result of the work; hetuh — cause; bhuh —
become; ma - not, never; te - you, of you; sangah — attachment; astu - let, there
should be; akarmani - in inaction, in not doing prescribed duties.

Your concern is with the respective action alone; its fruits are never within
your control. So, let not the fruit of action be your motive, nor let your
attachment be the non-performance of action. (2.47)

yoga-sthah kuru karmani sangam tyaktva dhananjaya
siddhy-asiddhyoh samo bhutva samatvam yoga ucyate (2.48)

yoga-sthah - steadfast in yoga, equipoised in yoga; kuru — perform; karmani —
your duties; sangam — attachment; karmani sangam - attachment; tyaktva -
having abandoned, giving up; dhananjaya - O Dhananjaya, O Arjuna; siddhi-
asiddhyoh — in success and failure; samah - the same; bhutva - having become,

becoming; samatvam - evenness, equanimity, equilibrium; yogah — yoga;
ucyate — is called.

O Dhannanjaya (Arjuna), steadfast in devotion perform your action, casting
off attachment, remaining the same in success and failure. Equilibrium is
called yoga (Karma-yoga). (2.48)

durena hy avaram karma buddhi-yogad dhananjaya
buddhau saranam anviccha krpanah phala-hetavah (2.49)

durena - by far, discard it at a long distance; hi - indeed, certainly; avaram -
inferior, abominable; karma - action, activity; buddhi-yogat - than the yoga of
knowledge (wisdom); dhananjaya — O Dhananjaya, O conqueror of wealth,
Arjuna; buddhau -in wisdom (knowledge); saranam —refuge; anviccha - seek,
try for; krpanah - wretched, piteous; phala-hetavah - seekers after fruits, those
desiring fruitive results.

Truly, mere action is far inferior to devotion in wisdom (buddhi-yoga). O
Dhananjaya (Arjuna), take refuge in wisdom (buddhi). Piteous are they
whose motive is in the fruit (of action). (2.49)

buddhi-yukto jahatiha ubhe sukrta-duskrte
tasmad yogaya yujyasva yogah karmasu kausalam (2.50)

buddhi-yuktah - endowed in wisdom (knowledge); jahati - casts off, discarding,
can get rid of; iha — in this life; ubhe — both; sukrta-duskrte - good and evil
deeds, good and bad results; tasmat — therefore; yogaya - to yoga; yujyasva -
devote yourself, be so engaged; yogah — yoga; karmasu - in actions, in all
activities; kausalam — skill.

He, who is fixed in wisdom, discards both good and evil works. Therefore,
take refuge in yoga (spiritual discipline on the way of oneness with the
Supreme Being). Yoga is skill in action. (2.50)

RESULTS OF KARMA YOGA

karma-jam buddhi-yukta hi phalam tyaktva manisinah
janma-bandha-vinirmuktah padam gacchanty anamayam (2.51)

karma-jam - action bound; buddhi-yuktah - united in wisdom, possessed of
knowledge; hi - indeed, certainly; phalam - the fruit, results; tyaktva - having
abandoned, giving up; manisinah - the wise, sages or devotees; janma-bandha -
- from the bondage of birth and death; vinirmuktah — liberated; janma-bandha

vinirmuktah — freed from the bonds of birth; padam - the abode; gacchanti -
go, they reach; anamayam - beyond evil, without miseries.

For those wise men united in wisdom, having renounced the fruit of action,
liberated from the bonds of birth, they go to that region that knows no ill.
(2.51)

yada te moha-kalilam buddhir vyatitarisyati
tada gantasi nirvedam srotavyasya srutasya ca (2.52)

yada — when; te — your; moha — of illusion; kalilam — dense forest; moha
kalilam - mire of illusion; buddhih —intellect; vyatitarisyati - crosses beyond,
surpasses; tada - then, at that time; ganta asi - you shall or will attain, you shall
go; nirvedam -to indifference, callousness; srotavyasya - of what has to be
heard, toward all that is to be heard; srutasya - of what has been heard, all that
is already heard; ca - and, also.

When your mind shall pass beyond the veil of delusion, then you will rise to
indifference to what has been heard, and what is yet to be heard. (2.52)

sruti-vipratipanna te yada sthasyati niscala
samadhav acala buddhis tada yogam avapsyasi (2.53)

sruti - scriptures, of Vedic revelation; vipratipanna — without being influenced
by the fruitive results; srutivipratipanna — perplexed by what you have heard;
te — your; yada — when; sthasyati - shall stand, remains; niscala - immovable,
unmoved; samadhau — in the Self, or, in the transcendental consciousness;
acala - steady, unflinching; buddhih — intellect; tada - then, at that time; yogam
— self-realization; avapsyasi - you shall attain, you will achieve.

When the mind, bewildered by the Scriptures (sruti), stands motionless and
still, fixed in contemplation (Samddhi), then you will attain Yoga (union
with the divine will). (2.53)

arjuna uvaca
sthita-prajnasya ka bhasa samadhi-sthasya kesava
sthita-dhih kim prabhaseta kim asita vrajeta kim (2.54)

arjunah uvaca — Arjuna said; sthita-prajnasya - of the man of steady wisdom;
ka — what; bhasa — description; samadhi-sthasya - of the man merged in the
superconsciousness state, of one situated in trance; kesava — O Krsna; sthita-
dhih - the sage (man) of steady knowledge (wisdom); kim - what (how);
prabhaseta — speaks; kim - what (how); asita - sits, does remain still; vrajeta —
walks; kim — how.

Arjuna said: O Kesava (Krsna), what is the mark of the man of steady
wisdom (knowledge), who is constant in contemplation? How does the man
of steady knowledge speak, sit and walk? (2.54)

DESCRIPTION OF THE PERFECT SAGE

sri-bhagavan uvaca
prajahati yada Kaman sarvan partha mano-gatan
atmany evatmana tustah. sthita-prajnas tadocyate (2.55)

sri-bhagavan uvaca - the Supreme Lord said, Sri Bhagavan said ; prajahati -
casts off, gives up; yada — when; kaman —desires; sarvan - all; partha — O son
of Prtha, Arjuna; manah-gatan - of the mind; atmani - in the Self; eva - only,
alone; atmana — by the Self; tustah — satisfied; sthita-prajnah - of steady
knowledge (wisdom), transcendentally situated; tada - then, at that time; ucyate

- (he) is called, is said.

The Supreme Lord said: O Partha (Arjuna), when a man has abandoned all
the desires of the mind, contented in the Self alone, then is he called a man
of steady knowledge. (2.55)

duhkhesv anudvigna-manah sukhesu vigata-sprhah
vita-raga-bhaya-krodhah sthita-dhir munir ucyate (2.56)

duhkhesu — in adversity; anudvigna-manah - of unshaken mind, of steady mind,
without being agitated in mind; sukhesu — in happiness, pleasure; vigata-sprhah

- without hankering, free from longing, without being interested; vita — free
from; raga — attachment; bhaya — fear; krodhah — and anger; vita rdga bhaya
krodhak - free from attachment, fear and anger; sthita-dhih - of steady mind,
whose mind is steady; munih — a sage; ucyate — is called.

He whose mind is undismayed in calamities, free from longing for
pleasures, from whom passion (rdga), fear and anger have fled, such a man
is called a sage of steady mind. (2.56)

yah sarvatranabhisnehas tat tat prapya subhasubham
nabhinandati na dvesti tasya prajna pratisthita (2.57)

yah - he who, one who; sarvatra — everywhere; anabhisnehah — without
attachment; tat — that; tat — that; prapya - having obtained, achieved; subha —
good; asubham — evil; na - not, never; abhinandati - rejoices, praises; na - not,
never; dvesti — hates; tasya - of him, his; prajna - wisdom, perfect knowledge;
pratisthita - is fixed, established.



Who has no attachment for any thing, who rejoices not at whatever good is
happening to him, nor hates the bad coming his way, such a one is firmly
established in knowledge. (2.57)

yada samharate cayam kurmo 'nganiva sarvasah
indriyanindriyarthebhyas tasya prajna pratisthita (2.58)

yada — when; samharate -withdraws; ca - and, also; ay am - he, this person
(yogi); kurmah — tortoise; angani — limbs; iva — like; sarvasah - everywhere,
altogether; indriyani - the senses; indriya-arthebhyah — from the sense-objects;
tasya - of him, his; prajna — wisdom; pratisthita - is steadied, firmly
established, fixed.

When a person completely withdraws his senses from the objects of sense,
as the tortoise withdraws its limbs from all sides, such a one is firmly
established in knowledge. (2.58)

visaya vinivartante niraharasya dehinah
rasa-varjam raso 'py asya param drstva nivartate (2.59)

visayah - the objects of senses, objects for sense enjoyment; vinivartante - turn
away, are practiced to be refrained from; niraharasya — abstinent; dehinah — for
the embodied, of the man; rasa-varjam - living the longing, giving up the taste;
rasah - longing, (taste); api - even, although there is; asya — of his; param - the
Supreme; drstva - having seen, at the vision, by experiencing; nivartate - turns
away, he ceases from.

The objects of sense abandon the abstinent man, but not the longing for
them. But this relish vanishes at the vision of the Supreme Being. (2.59)

DANGERS OF TURBULENT SENSES

yatato hy api Kaunteya purusasya vipascitah
indriyani pramathini haranti prasabham manah (2.60)

yatatah - of the striving, while endeavoring; hi - indeed, certainly; api - even,
in spite of; kaunteya — O son of Kunti, Arjuna; purusasya — of man; vipascitah -
- (of the) wise, full of discriminating knowledge; indriyani — the senses;






pramathini - turbulent, agitating; haranti - carry away, throw; prasabham -
violently, by force; manah — the mind.

O son of Kunti (Kaunteya, Arjuna), the turbulent senses of even a wise man,
though he be striving, seduce forcibly his mind. (2.60)

tani sarvani samyamya yukta asita mat-parah
vase hi yasyendriyani tasya prajna pratisthita (2.61)

tani - those, them; sarvani — all; samyamya - having restrained, keeping under
control; yuktah - joined, engaged; asita - should sit, should be situated; mat-
parah - intent on me, in relationship with Me; vase — , under control; hi -
indeed, certainly; yasya - whose, one whose; indriyani — senses; tasya — his;
prajna - wisdom, knowledge; pratisthita - (is) settled, fixed.

Having restrained them all, a man should remain steadfast, with intent on
Me alone. He whose senses are so controlled is steady in knowledge. (2.61)

dhyayato visayan pumsah sangas tesupajayate
sangat sanjayate kamah kamat krodho 'bhijayate (2.62)

dhyayatah — thinking; visayan - on sense objects; pumsah — of a person;
sangah — attachment; tesu — in them; upajayate - develops; sangat — from
attachment; sanjayate - is born, arises, develops; kamah - desire; kamat — from
desire; krodhah — anger; abhijayate - arises, becomes manifest.

When a man thinks of objects of sense develops attachment to them. From
attachment arises desire, and desire results in anger. (2.62)

krodhad bhavati sammohah sammohat smrti-vibhramah
smrti-bhramsad buddhi-naso buddhi-nasat pranasyati (2.63)

krodhat — from anger; bhavati - comes, takes place; sammohah —delusion,
bewilderment; sammohat — from delusion, from bewilderment; smrti-vibhramah
- loss of memory, confused memory; smrti-bhramsat - from loss of memory,
from confused memory; buddhi-nasah - the destruction of discrimination;
buddhi-nasat — and from the destruction of discimination; pranasyati - he
perishes, he falls down.

From anger comes bewilderment; from bewilderment confused memory.
Confused memory destroys the conscience, and once his conscience is
destroyed, he perishes. (2.63)

SENSE CONTROL LEADS TO PEACE AND HAPPINESS

raga-dvesa-vimuktais tu visayan indriyais caran
atma-vasyair vidheyatma prasadam adhigacchati (2.64)

raga - attraction, attachment; dvesa — and repulsion, detachment; vimuktaih —
by one who has become free from; raga dvesa vimuktaih — free from attraction
and repulsion; tu — but; visayan - objects, sense objects; indriyaih - with
senses, by the senses; caran - moving among, approaching, acting upon; atma-
vasyaih - self-restrained, under one's control; vidheya-atma - the self-
controlled, one who follows regulated freedom; prasadam — the mercy of the
Lord, to peace; adhigacchati — attains.

He attains peace, who, disciplined, approaches objects with the senses
devoid of attraction and repulsion, and brought under his self-control.
(2.64)

prasade sarva-duhkhanam hanir asyopajayate
prasanna-cetaso hy asu buddhih paryavatisthate (2.65)

prasade -in peace; sarva — of all; duhkhanam — material miseries;
sarvaduhkhanam - (of) all pains; hanih — destruction; asya - his, of him;
upajayate - arises, takes place; prasanna-cetasah - of the tranquil-minded, of
the happy-minded; hi - certainly, because; asu — very soon, soon; buddhih -
mind, intellect; pari — sufficiently; avatisthate — becomes established, becomes
steady.

In peace, all misery has come to an end, for of him whose heart is tranquil,
the mind soon becomes steady. (2.65)

nasti buddhir ayuktasya na cayuktasya bhavana
na cabhavayatah santir asantasya kutah sukham (2.66)

na — not;asti - is; na asti - there is no, there cannot be; buddhih —knowledge;
ayuktasya - of the unsteady; na — not; ca — and; ayuktasya -of the unsteady;
bhavana - concentration, meditation, fixed mind in ... ; na — not; ca — and;
abhavayatah — of one who is not fixed, of the one without concentration, of the
unmeditative ; santih — peace; asantasya — of the unpeaceful, of the peaceless;
kutah — where is, whence; sukham — happiness.

There is no pure knowledge for the unsteady, nor for the unsteady
concentration, and for him without concentration there is no peace, and for
the peaceless how can there be happiness? (2.66)

indriyanam hi caratam yan mano 'nuvidhiyate
tad asya harati prajnam vayur navam ivambhasi (2.67)

indriyanam - senses, of the senses; hi - for, certainly; caratam - wandering,
while roaming; yat — which; manah — the mind; anuvidhiyate - follows,
becomes constantly engaged; tat — that; asya — his; harati - carries away, takes
away; prajnam — discrimmination; vayuh — wind; navam — boat; iva — like;
ambhasi — on the water, upon the water(s).

Hither and thither the senses rove, and when the mind is attuned to them,
sweeps away his knowledge, just as the wind carries away a ship upon the
waters. (2.67)

tasmad yasya maha-baho nigrhitani sarvasah
indriyanindriyarthebhyas tasya prajna pratisthita (2.68)

tasmat — therefore; yasya — whose; maha-baho — O mighty-armed one, Arjuna;
nigrhitani — so curbed down; sarvasah - completely, all around; indriyani — the
senses; indriya-arthebhyah — from sense objects; tasya — his; prajna —
knowledge; pratisthita - is steady, fixed.

Therefore, O Mighty-armed (Arjuna), he whose senses are restrained from
the objects of sense, of him his knowledge is steady. (2.68)

THE UNIVERSE A REAL DREAM TO THE SAGE

ya nisa sarva-bhutanam tasyam jagarti samyami
yasyam jagrati bhutani sa nisa pasyato muneh (2.69)

ya — which; nisa - is night; sarva — all; bhutanam — of living entities, of the
living beings; sarvabhutanam - of all living entities, of all beings; tasyam — in
that; jagarti - wakes, is wakeful; samyami — the self-controlled; yasyam — in
which; jagrati - wake, are awake; bhutani — all beings; sa — that ; nisa — night;
pasyatah - (of the) seeing, for the introspective; muneh - of the sage, of the
Muni.

In what for other beings is night, for the disciplined man is the time of
waking. When all beings are awake, then it is night for the Sage who sees.
(2.69)

apuryamanam acala-pratistham samudram apah pravisanti yadvat
tadvat kama yam pravisanti sarve sa santim apnoti na kama-kami (2.70)

apuryamanam - filled from all sides; acala-pratistham - based in stillness,
steadily situated; samudram — the ocean; apah — waters; pravisanti — enter;
yadvat — as; tadvat — so; kamah — desires; yam - whom, unto whom; pravisanti
— enter; sarve — all; sa/z - he, that person; santim — peace; apnoti - attains,
achieves; na — not; kama-kami — one who desires to fulfill desires, the desirer of
desires.

He attains peace, into whom all desires flow as waters flow into the ocean,
which, filled from all sides, remains unmoving in its depths, but not the
desirer of desires. (2.70)

vihaya kaman yah sarvan pumams carati nihsprhah
nirmamo nirahankarah sa santim adhigacchati (2.71)

vihaya - abandoning, giving up; kaman - desires, material desires for sense
gratification; yah - who, that; sarvan — all; puman - man, a person; carati -
lives, moves about; nihsprhah - desireless, free from longing; nirmamah -
devoid of ownership, without a sense of proprietorship, devoid of self-
importance; nirahankarah - without egoism, without false ego; sah — he; santim
— peace; adhigacchati — attains.

That man attains peace who puts off all desires and goes about without
attachment, selfishness and self-importance. (2.71)

KNOWLEDGE LEADS TO BRAHMA-NIRVANA

esa brahmi sthitih Partha nainam prapya vimuhyati
sthitvasyam anta-kale 'pi brahma-nirvanam rcchati (2.72)

esa — this; brahmi - of Brahman; sthitih - state, situation; partha — O son of
Prtha, Arjuna; na - not, never; enam — this; prapya - having obtained;
vimuhyati — one is bewildered, is deluded; sthitva - being established, being
situated; asyam — in this; anta-kale — at the end of ; api — also; brahma-
nirvanam - oneness with Brahman; rcchati — one attains.

O Partha (Arjuna), this is the Brahmic state. Having attained to this, none is
bewildered. Remaining in this state even at the time of death, one attains
Brahma-nirvana. (2.72)

In the Upanisad of the Bhagavadglta, the knowledge of Brahman the
Supreme, the science of yoga, and the dialogue between Srlkrsna and

Arjuna, this is the second discourse entitled, "Sankhya Theory and Yoga
Practices".

Third Discourse

Karma Yoga

WHICH IS BETTER KNOWLEDGE OR ACTION?

arjuna uvaca
jyayasi cet karmanas te mata buddhir janardana
tat kim karmani ghore mam niyojayasi Kesava (3.01)

arjunah uvaca — Arjuna said; jyayasi - superior, better; cet — if; karmanah —
than action; te — by You; mata - think, thought; buddhih — knowledge;
janardana — O Krsna; tat - then, therefore; kim — why; karmani — in action;
ghore - terrible, ghastly; mam — me; niyojayasi — You are engaging; kesava —
O Krsna.

Arjuna said: O Janardana (Krsna), if you think that knowledge is superior
to action, why then, O Kesava (Krsna), do you command me to carry out a
terrible action? (3.01)

vyamisreneva vakyena buddhim mohayasiva me
tad ekam vada niscitya yena sreyo 'ham apnuyam (3.02)

vyamisrena — perplexing; iva - as it were; vakyena - with speech, words;
buddhim - understanding, mind; mohayasi - You are confused, You are
bewildering; iva - as it were; me — my; tat —that; ekam — only one; vada - tell
me; niscitya - with certainty, ascertaining; yena — by which; sreyah - bliss, real
benefit; aham — I; apnuyam — may have, attain.

With these perplexing words, You confuse as it were my mind. Tell me with
certainty the one way by which I may attain bliss. (3.02)

THE PATHS OF KNOWLEDGE AND ACTION

sri-bhagavan uvaca
loke 'smin dvi-vidha nistha pura prokta mayanagha
jnana-yogena sankhyanam karma-yogena yoginam (3.03)

sri-bhagavan uvaca -the Supreme Lord said; loke — in the world; asmin - in
this; dvi-vidha — two kinds of, twofold; nistha — path; pura - previously,
formerly; prokta — said; maya — by Me; anagha — O sinless one, Arjuna; jnana-
yogena - by the path of knowledge, by the linking process of knowledge;
sankhyanam - of the Sankhyas, of the empiric philosophers; karma-yogena -by
the path of action; yoginam — of the yogis, devotees.

The Supreme Lord said: O sinless one (Arjuna), as it has been stated by Me
before, in this world there is a twofold path, that of knowledge (Jhana-yoga)
for those who contemplate and that of action (Karma-yoga) for those who
act. (3.03)

na karmanam anarambhan
naiskarmyam puruso 'snute
na ca sannyasanad eva
siddhim samadhigacchati (3.04)

na — not; karmanam - of actions; anarambhat - from non-performance;
naiskarmyam — freedom from reaction, action, actionlessness; purusah — a man;
asnute - reaches, achieves, win; na - not, nor; ca - and, also; sannyasanat — by
renunciation; eva - only, simply; siddhim — perfection; samadhigacchati —
attains.

Not by leaving action undone does man win freedom from the bond of
action, nor by renunciation alone does he attain perfection. (3.04)

THE DELUDED ARE INFLUENCED BY NATURE

na hi kascit ksanam api jatu tisthaty akarma-krt
karyate hy avasah karma sarvah prakrti-jair gunaih (3.05)

na hi — not; kascit — anyone; ksanam — a moment; api - even, also; jatu —
verily; tisthati — remains; akarma-krt — without performing action, without
acting; karyate — is made; hi — for; avasah — helpless; karma - action, work;
sarvah — all; prakrti-jaih — born of the modes of material nature, born of
Prakriti; gunaih — by the qualities, impulses, contingents.

Not for a moment can a man remain without acting; for every man is
helpless, and forced to work by the impulses born of nature. (3.05)

karmendriyani samyamya ya aste manasa smaran
indriyarthan vimudhatma mithyacarah sa ucyate (3.06)

karma-indriyani - organs of action, the five working sense organs; samyamya —
restraining; yah - who, anyone who; aste - sits, remains; manasa — by the mind;
smaran - remembering, thinking of; indriya-arthan — sense objects; vimudha -
of the deluded, of deluded understanding, foolish; atma — soul; mithya-acarah -
hypocrite, pretender; sah — he; ucyate — is called.

The deluded who controls his limbs through which he acts, but sits thinking
in his mind about sense-objects, is said to be a hypocrite. (3.06)

WHY KARMA-YOGA (SELFLESS SERVICE)?

yas tv indriyani manasa niyamyarabhate 'rjuna
karmendriyaih karma-yogam asaktah sa visisyate (3.07)

yah — one who, whoso; tu — but; indriyani — the senses; manasa — by the mind;
niyamya - controlling, regulating; arabhate - commences, begins; arjuna — O
Arjuna; karma-indriyaih — by the active sense organs, by the organs of action;
karma-yogam - karma yoga; asaktah — without attachment, unattached; sah —
he; visisyate - excels, is by far the better.

But he who controls his senses with his mind, O Arjuna, using the organs of
action without attachment, is worthily engaged in Karma-yoga. (3.07)

niyatam kuru karma tvam karma jyayo hy akarmanah
sarira-yatrapi ca te na prasiddhyed akarmanah (3.08)

niyatam - prescribed, bounden ; kuru - perform, do; karma — actions; tvam —
you; karma - action, work; jyayah - superior, better; hi — for; akarmanah —
than no work, than inaction; sarira — bodily; yatra — maintenance; api — even;
ca - and, also; te — your; na - not, never; prasiddhyet - would be possible;
akarmanah — without work, by inaction.

Perform the action that is prescribed for you, for action is superior to
inaction. And even the maintenance of the body would not be possible for
you by inaction. (3.08)

yajnarthat karmano 'nyatra loko 'yam karma-bandhanah
tad-artham karma Kaunteya mukta-sangah samacara (3.09)

yajna-arthat - for the sake of sacrifice, done only for the sake of Yajna, (or
Vishnu); karmanah - of action; anyatra — otherwise; lokah — world; ayam —
this; karma-bandhanah - bound by action, bondage by work; tat — of Him;
artham — for the sake; tad artham - for that sake; karma - action, work;
kaunteya — O son of Kunti, Arjuna; mukta-sangah - liberated from association,
free from attachment; samacara - peform, do perfectly.

Except for action performed for the sake of sacrifice (selfless service), all
others holds the world action-bound. Therefore, O son of Kunti (Arjuna),
perform your action free from attachment. (3.09)

saha-yajnah prajah srstva purovaca prajapatih
anena prasavisyadhvam esa vo 'stv ista-kama-dhuk (3.10)

saha — along with; yajnah — sacrifices; sahayajnah — together with sacrifice
prajah — mankind; srstva - having created, creating; pura - in the beginning,
anciently; uvaca — said; praja-patih - Prajapati, the Lord of creation; anena —
by this; prasavisyadhvam — be more and more prosperous, you shall propagate,
prolong your lineage; esah — this; vah — your; astu — let it be; ista — of all
desirable things; kama-dhuk - bestower; ista kama dhuk — milk cow of your
desires.

Of old, the Lord of Creation (Prajapati) emanating mankind together with
sacrifice (selfless service), said: By this you shall prolong your lineage; let
this be to you the cow that gives the milk of all your desires. (3.10)

devan bhavayatanena te deva bhavayantu vah
parasparam bhavayantah sreyah param avapsyatha (3.11)

devan - the gods, devas; bhavayata - sustain, nourish (you); anena - with this;
te — those; devah - gods, devas; bhavayantu - may sustain, may nourish; vah —
you; parasparam - one another, mutually; bhavayantah - sustaining,
nourishing; sreyah - good, benediction; param - the highest, the supreme;
avapsyatha - shall attain, you will achieve.

With this you shall sustain the gods, so that the gods may on their turn
sustain you. Thus, sustaining one another, you shall attain the highest good.
(3.11)

istan bhogan hi vo deva dasyante yajna-bhavitah
tair dattan apradayaibhyo yo bhunkte stena eva sah (3.12)

istan — desired; bhogan - objects, necessities of life; hi —so; vah - unto (to) you;
devah — the gods, devas; dasyante - will give, will award; yajna-bhavitahvitah -
nourished by sacrifice, being satisfied by the performance of sacrifices; taih —
by them; dattan - given, things given; apradaya — without offering; ebhyah — to
them; yah — he who; bhunkte — enjoys; stenah — thief; eva - truly, certainly; sah
- he.

For, so sustained by sacrifice (selfless service), the gods will grant you your
desired enjoyments. Whoso enjoys their gift, without offering to Them in
return, is indeed a thief. (3.12)

yajna-sistasinah santo mucyante sarva-kilbisaih
bhunjate te tv agham papa ye pacanty atma-karanat (3.13)

yajna-sista - who eat the leavings of the sacrifice, of food taken after
performance of Yajna (sacrifice); asinah — eaters; santah — the righteous,
devotees, (yogis); mucyante - are freed, get relief; sarva — all kinds of; kilbisaih

— from sins; bhunjate — eat; te - those, they; tu — indeed; agham — grievous
sins; papah - sinful ones, sinners; ye — who; pacanti - cook, prepare food;
atma-karanat - for their own sakes.

The righteous who eat of the leavings of the sacrifice, are freed from all
sins; but, impious are they, and evil do they eat who cook food for their own
(selfish) sakes. (See also RV 10.117.06) (3.13)

THE WHEEL OF THE WORLD SHOULD BE TURNING

annad bhavanti bhutani parjanyad anna-sambhavah
yajnad bhavati parjanyo yajnah karma -samudbhavah (3.14)

annat - from food, from grains; bhavanti - come forth, grow; bhutani - beings,
the material bodies; parianyat — from rains; anna — of food grains; sambhavah -

- production; annasamblavah - production of food; yajnat — from the
performance of sacrifice, from sacrifice; bhavati - arises, becomes possible;
parjanyah — rain; yajnah — performance of Yajna (sacrifice); karma —
prescribed duties; samudbhavah — born of; karmasamudblavah - born of action.

From food creatures are born, and food from rain; and rain comes forth
from sacrifice (selfless service); and sacrifice is born of action. (3.14)

karma brahmodbhavam viddhi brahmaksara-samudbhavam
tasmat sarva-gatam brahma nityam yajne pratisthitam (3.15)

karma - action, work; brahma — Brahma; udbhavam - arisen, produced;
brahmodbhavam — arisen from Brahma; viddhi - know, you should know;
brahma — Brahma; aksara - the Imperishable; samudbhavam — directly
manifested; aksarasamudbhavam - arisen from the Imperoshable; tasmat —
therefore; sarva-gatam — all-pervading; brahma — Brahma; nityam - ever,
eternally; yajne — in sacrifice; pratisthitam - situated, (is) established, ever
present.

Know that action comes from Brahman, and Brahman is from the
Imperishable. Therefore, Brahman, the all-pervading, is ever present in
sacrifice (selfless service). (3.15)

evam pravartitam cakram nanuvartayatiha yah
aghayur indriyaramo mogham partha sa jivati (3.16)

evam — thus; pravartitam - set revolving, set in motion; cakram - wheel, cycle;
na - not; anuvartayati — follow; iha - here, in this life; yah — one who; agha-
ayuh - living in sins, of sinful life, whose life is full of sins; indriya-aramah -
satisfied/rejoicing in the senses (in sense gratification); mogham - in vain,
uselessly; partha — O son of Prtha (Arjuna); sah — ho,; jivati — lives.

He who on earth does not follow the wheel thus set in motion, who is of
sinful life, indulging in the senses, O Partha (Arjuna), he lives in vain. (3.16)

yas tv atma-ratir eva syad atma-trptas ca manavah
atmany eva ca santustas tasya karyam na vidyate (3.17)

yah - who, one who; tu — but; atma-ratih - rejoices in the Self, taking pleasure
in the Self; eva — only; syat — maybe; atma-trptah - satisfied in the Self; ca —
and; manavah — the man; atmani — in the Self; eva — only; ca — and; santustah

- contented, perfectly satiated; tasya — his; karyam - work to be done, duty; na -

- not; vidyate - is, exist.

However, the man who rejoices in the Self -alone, who is satisfied with the
Self-alone, in the Self-alone content, there is nothing he needs to do. (3.17)

naiva tasya krtenartho nakrteneha kascana
na casya sarva-bhutesu kascid artha-vyapasrayah (3.18)

na - not, never; eva — even; tasya - of him; krtena — by action; arthah —
concern; na - not, nor; akrtena - by actions not done; iha —here; kascana - any,
whatever; na - not, never; ca — and; asya — of him, of this man; sarva-bhutesu -
upon any contingent being, in all beings, among all living beings; kascit — any;
artha — purpose; vyapasrayah — taking shelter of; arthavyapasrayah -
depending for any object .

For him, there is here no interest in what is done, or what is not done. Nor
does he depend upon any contingent being for attaining any purpose. (3.18)

ARJUNA FIT FOR KARMA-YOGA

tasmad asaktah satatam karyam karma samacara
asakto hy acaran karma param apnoti purusah (3.19)

tasmat — therefore; asaktah — without attachment; satatam - always, constantly;
karyam - which should be done, have to do, as duty; karma - action, work;
samacara — perform; asaktah - without attachment, unattached; hi — because;
acaran — performing; karma - action, work; param — the Supreme; apnoti -
attains, achieves, reaches; purusah — man.

Therefore, without attachment perform what you have to do, for
performing action without attachment, man really reaches the Supreme.
(3.19)

karmanaiva hi samsiddhim asthita janakadayah
loka-sangraham evapi sampasyan kartum arhasi (3.20)

karmana — by action/work; eva - only, even; hi - only, for sure, certainly;
samsiddhim — perfection; asthitah — attained; janaka-adayah — Janaka and
others ; loka-sangraham — the protection of the people (in general), for the
protection of the world; eva api — only; sampasyan - considering, having in
view; kartum — to act/perform; arhasi — you should.

It was through action only that Janaka and others tried to attain perfection.
Even again for the protection of the world you should perform action. (3.20)

yad yad acarati sresthas tat tad evetaro janah
sa yat pramanam kurute lokas tad anuvartate (3.21)

yat yat — whatever; acarati — he does; sresthah — a respectable leader, the
noblest; tat — that; tat — and that alone; eva — only; itarah - the other; janah -
persons, people; sah — he; yat - whatever, whichever, what; pramanam —
example; kurute — does perform; lokah — all the world; tat — that; anuvartate —
follows in the footsteps.

For whatever the noblest does, is also done by others; whatever norm he
sets up, the world will follow. (3.21)

na me parthasti kartavyam trisu lokesu kincana
nanavaptam avaptavyam varta eva ca karmani (3.22)

na — not; me - Mine, My; partha — son of Prtha (Arjuna); asti - (there) is;
kartavyam - to be done (duty); prescribed duty; trisu — in the three; lokesu -
worlds, planetary systems; kincana — anything; na - not, nothing; anavaptam —
unattained; avaptavyam — to be gained, to be attained; varte — I am engaged;
eva — also; ca — and; karmani - in action, in prescribed duty.

O Partha (Arjuna), in the three worlds there is nothing that I must
accomplish at all. Nor anything unattained which I have not attained, yet I
am engaged in action. (3.22)

yadi hy aham na varteyam jatu karmany atandritah
mama vartmanuvartante manusyah partha sarvasah (3.23)

yadi — if; hi - surely, certainly; aham — I; na — do not; varteyam - engage in
action; jatu — ever; karmani - in action, in the performance of prescribed duties;
atandritah - tirelessly, unwearied, with great care; mama — My; vartma — path;
anuvartante — follow; manusyah — men; partha — O son of Prtha, Arjuna;
sarvasah — in every way, in all matters.

For were I not be tirelessly engaged in action, then, would men in all
matters follow My path, O Partha (Arjuna). (3.23)

utsideyur ime loka na kuryam karma ced aham
sankarasya ca karta syam upahanyam imah prajah (3.24)

utsideyuh — would be put into ruin, would perish; ime — these; lokah — worlds;
na — not; kuryam - would do, I perform; karma - action, prescribed duties; cet -
- if; aham — I; sankarasya - of confusion of castes, of unwanted population; ca -
- and; karta - author, creator; syam — would be; upahanyam — would destroy;
imah — these; prajah — living entities, living beings, creatures.

If I were not engaged in action, these worlds would fall to ruin, and I should
be the cause of confusion of castes, and destroy these creatures. (3.24)

THE WISE MAN'S ACTION CONTRASTED WITH THAT OF THE

IGNORANT

saktah karmany avidvamso yatha kurvanti bharata
kuryad vidvams tathasaktas cikirsur loka-sangraham (3.25)

saktah — attached; karmani - to action, in prescribed duties; avidvamsah — the
ignorant; yatha - as ; kurvanti - act, they do; bharata — O descendant of
Bharata, Arjuna; kuryat - should act, must do; vidvan - the wise, the learned;
tatha - so, thus; asaktah - unattached, without attachment; cikirsuh - desiring,
wishing, longing; loka-sangraham — the welfare of the world.

Therefore, O Bharata (Arjuna), as the ignorant act attached to action, the
wise man should perform action unattached, longing the welfare of the
world. (3.25)

na buddhi-bhedam janayed ajnanam karma-sanginam
josayet sarva-karmani vidvan yuktah samacaran (3.26)

na — not; buddhi-bhedam - unsettlement in the minds, disruption of intelligence;
janayet — he should cause, he should produce; ajnanam — of the foolish, of the
ignorant; karma-sanginam -of the persons attached to actions; josayet — he
should be engaged, he should do; sarva — all; karmani - action(s); vidvan - the
wise, a learned person; yuktah — engaged; samacaran - performing, practising.

Let the wise man not perturb the mind of ignorant people attached to
action, let him encourage them to do all actions as himself, fulfilling them
with devotion (selfless service, in the spirit of yoga). (See also 3.29) (3.26)

prakrteh kriyamanani gunaih karmani sarvasah
ahankara- vimudhatma kartaham iti manyate (3.27)

prakrteh — of material nature; kriyamanani - are performed, being done; gunaih
— by the modes, by the constituents, by the qualities; karmani - actions,
activities; sarvasah - in all cases, all kinds of; ahankara-vimudhatma -one
whose mind is deluded by egoism, being fooled by the ego; atma - mind, spirit,
soul; karta — doer; aham — I; iti — thus; manyate — he thinks.

All actions are done by the constituents of nature (prakrti). He, whose mind
is fooled by the ego, thinks 'I am the doer'. (See also 5.09, 13.29, and 14.19)

(3.27)

tattva-vit tu maha-baho guna-karma- vibhagayoh
guna gunesu vartanta iti matva na sajjate (3.28)

tattva-vit — the knower of Truth; tu — but; maha-baho — O mighty-armed,
Arjuna; guna-karma vibhagayoh - of the divisions of qualities and functions, the
constituents and actions; vibhagayoh — differences; gunah - the constituents, the
qualities, the modes (in the shape of senses); gunesu - the constituents, the
qualities, the modes (in the shape of objects); vartante — remain; iti — thus;
matva - knowing, thinking; na - not, never; sajjate — is attached.

But he, O mighty-armed (Arjuna), who knows that these constituents and
actions are distinct from himself, and that only the Constituents on
constituents are acting, is not attached. (3.28)

prakrter guna-sammudhah sajjante guna-karmasu
tan akrtsna-vido Mandan krtsna-vin na vicalayet (3.29)

prakrteh — of material nature; guna — by the modes, by the constituents, by the
modes; sammudhah - deluded by material identification; sajjante - are attached,
they become engaged; guna-karmasu — in material activities, in the functions of
the constituents, qualities, modes; tan — those; akrtsna-vidah - persons of
imperfect knowledge, with a poor fund of knowledge; mandan - the foolish, the
deluded; krtsna-vit - man of perfect knowledge; na — not; vicalayet — should try
to agitate, should unsettle.

Those deluded by the constituents of Nature (prakrti, material nature) are
attached to the actions of those functions. The wise should not perturb the
unwise whose knowledge is imperfect. (see also 3.26) (3.29)

HOW A SEEKER FOR MOKSHA SHOULD PERFORM ACTIONS

mayi sarvani karmani sannyasyadhyatma-cetasa
nirasir nirmamo bhutva yudhyasva vigata-jvarah (3.30)

mayi - in, on Me; sarvani — all; karmani - actions, activities; sonny asya —
giving up, renouncing; adhyatmacetasa — with the mind fixed in the Self; cetasa
- mind, consciousness; nirasih - freed from hope; nirmamah — without
ownership, freed from selfishness (ownership); bhutva - having become;
yudhyasva - you fight; vigata-jvarah — without being lethargic, devoid of
mental fever.

Cast all your actions on Me, with your mind fixed in the Self, freed from
hope and selfishness, devoid of mental fever, do fight (engage in battle).
(3.30)

ye me matam idam nityam anutisthanti manavah
sraddhavanto 'nasuyanto mucyante te 'pi karmabhih (3.31)

ye — those who; me — My; matam — teaching; idam - this, these; nityam -
constantly, as an eternal function; anutisthanti — practise; manavah - men,
human beings; sraddha-vantah - full of faith; anasuyantah - without cavilling,
envy; mucyante - are free; te - they, all of them; api - also, even; karmabhih —
from the bondage of actions.

Those who constantly practise this teaching of Mine with faith and without
cavilling, they too will find release from the bondage of actions. (3.31)

ye tv etad abhyasuyanto nanutisthanti me matam
sarva-jnana-vimudhams tan viddhi nastan acetasah (3.32)

ye — those; tu - but, however; etat — this; abhyasuyantah — carping out; na — do
not; anutisthanti — practise; me — My; matam — teaching; sarva-jnana
vimudhan - deluded in all sorts of knowledge; vimudhan — perfectly deluded;
tan — them; viddhi — know; nastan — all ruined; acetasah - devoid of
discrimination.

But those who, carping at My teaching, and do not practice it, know them
as deluded in all knowledge, mindless and lost. (3.32)

INFLUENCE OF MAN'S NATURE ON HIS CONDUCT

sadrsam cestate svasyah prakrter jnanavan api
prakrtim yanti bhutani nigrahah kim karisyati (3.33)

sadrsam - in accordance, according; cestate — acts; svasyah — of his own;
prakrteh - of nature, modes of nature; jnana-van - man of knowledge, a wise
man, learned; api - even, although; prakrtim - to nature; yanti — follow; bhutani
- beings, all living entities; nigrahah - restraint, repression; kim — what;
karisyati — can do.

Even the man of knowledge behaves according to his own nature. All beings
follow their nature. So, what can repression do? (3.33)

Indriyasyendriyasyarthe raga-dvesau vyavasthitau
tayor na vasam agacchet tau hy asya paripanthinau (3.34)

indriyasya - to the senses; indriyasya - of the senses; arthe — in the object; raga
— attachment; dvesau — also detachment; ragadvesau — attachment and
aversion, love and hate; vyavasthitau — seated; tayoh — of them/these; na - not,
never; vasam — sway; agacchet — one should come under; tau - these two; hi -
for sure, certainly; asya — his; paripanthinau — stumbling blocks, foes.

In all the senses love and hate (affection and aversion) are turned to their
proper objects; let no one become victim to their power, for they are
enemies of the path. (3.34)

sreyan sva-dharmo vigunah para-dharmat sv-anusthitat
sva-dharme nidhanam sreyah para-dharmo bhayavahah (3.35)

sreyan — better; sva-dharmah — one's own duties; vigunah - devoid of merit,
even faulty; para-dharmat — than the duty of another ; su-anusthitat - than well-
discharged, perfectly done; sva-dharme — in one's own duty; nidhanam - death,
destruction; sreyah — better; para-dharmah - another's duty; bhaya-avahah -
dangerous, fraught with fear.

Better to perform one's own duty (dharma), though deprived of merit, than
the duty of another well discharged. Better to die in one's own duty, for it is
perilous to follow another's duty. (See also 18.47) (3.35)

DESIRE IS THE ENEMY OF MAN

arjuna uvaca
atha kena prayukto 'yam papam carati purusah
anicchann api varsneya balad iva ni yojitah (3.36)

arjunah uvaca — Arjuna said; atha — now; kena — by what, by which; prayuktah
— impelled; ayam — this; papam — sin; carati — does; purusah — a man;
anicchan — without desiring, not wishing, unwilling; api - even, although;
varsneya — O descendant of Vrsni (Krsna); balat — by force; iva — as if, as it
were; niyojitah — constrained.

Arjuna said: O Varsneya (Krsna), by what provocation does a man commit
sin as though he were constrained by force, unwilling though he be? (3.36)

sri-bhagavan uvaca
kama esa krodha esa rajo-guna-samudbhavah
mahasano maha-papma viddhy enam iha vairinam (3.37)

sri-bhagavan uvaca - the Supreme Lord said; kamah - lust, desire; esah — this;
krodhah - anger, wrath; esah — this; rajah-guna — the mode of passion;
samudbhavah — born of; maha-asanah — all-devouring; maha-papma — greatly
sinful, all-sinful; viddhi — know; enam — this; iha — here; vairinam — greatest
enemy, the foe.

The Supreme Lord said: It is desire, it is anger, arising from rajas (passion)
constituent, all-devouring and all sinful. Know this to be your enemy on
earth. (3.37)

DESIRE CONCEALS KNOWLEDGE

dhumenavriyate vahnir yathadarso malena ca
yatholbenavrto garbhas tatha tenedam avrtam (3.38)

dhumena — by smoke; avriyate — is covered, is enveloped; vahnih — fire; yatha
— as; adarsah — mirror; malena — by dust; ca - and, also; yatha- as; ulbena - by
the amnion, by the womb; avrtah - enveloped, is covered; garbhah — embryo;
tatha — so; tena — by it; idam — this; avrtam — is covered, enveloped.

Just as fire is surrounded by smoke, a mirror by dust, an embryo enclosed
by the womb, so "This" (knowledge, Brahma-jndna) is covered by it (rajas,
lust). (3.38)

avrtam jnanam etena jnanino nitya-vairina
kama-rupena Kaunteya duspurenanalena clena ca (3.39)

avrtam - covered, enveloped; jnanam - wisdom, knowledge; etena — by this;
jnaninah — of the wise, knower; nitya-vairina — by the constant enemy; kama-
rupena - whose form is desire, in the form of lust; kaunteya — O son of Kunti
(Arjuna); duspurena — never to be satisfied, unappaisable, insatiable; analena —
by the fire; ca - and, also.

Covered, O son of Kunti (Arjuna) is knowledge by this constant enemy of
the wise in the form of desire, which is insatiable fire. (3.39)

indriyani mano buddhir asyadhisthanam ucyate
etair vimohayaty esa jnanam avrtya dehinam (3.40)

indriyani — the senses; manah — the mind; buddhih — the intellect; asya — its;
adhisthanam - seat, sitting place; ucyate — is called; etaih - by these;
vimohayati - deludes, bewilders; esah — this lust; jnanam - wisdom,
knowledge; avrt ya - covering, having enveloped; dehinam — of the embodied
(Self).

The senses, the mind and intellect (reason) are said to be its seat. With their
support, it fences knowledge in, deluding the embodied Self. (3.40)

HOW TO KILL OUT DESIRE

tasmat tvam indriyany adau niyamya bharatarsabha
papmanam prajahi hy enam jnana- vijnana-nasanam (3.41)

tasmat — therefore; tvam — you; indriyani - the senses; adau — in the beginning;
niyamya — by regulating, having controlled; bharata-rsabha — O best of the
Bharatas, Arjuna; papmanam — of sinful; prajahi - destroy, kill; hi - surely,
certainly; enam — this; jnana — of knowledge; vijnana — and knowledge of the
pure soul; nasanam — the destroyer; Jnana vijnana nasanam - the destroyer
(destructor) of the knowledge and realisation.

Therefore, O best of the Bharatas (Arjuna) restrain the senses first, and
destroy this evil thing (sin), which is destructive for knowledge and
realisation. (3.41)

indriyani parany ahur indriyebhyah param manah
manasas tu para buddhir yo buddheh paratas tu sah (3.42)

indriyani - the senses; parani — superior; ahuh - they say; indriyebhyah — than
the senses; param — superior; manah — the mind; manasah - higher than the
mind; tu - but,; para — superior; buddhih — intellect; yah — who; buddheh —
than the intelligence; paratah — greater; tu — but; sah — he.

They say that the senses are superior to the body, higher than the senses is
the mind, yet higher than the mind is the intellect, but what is greater than
the intellect is "He" (the Supreme). (See also KaU 3.10 and GIta 6.07-08)
(3.42)

evam buddheh param buddhva samstabhyatmanam atmana
jahi satrum maha-baho kama-rupam durasadam (3.43)

evam — thus; buddheh - than the intellect; param - superior, beyond the;
buddhva - having known, knowing; samstabhya - restraining, subduing, by
steadying; atmanam — the self; atmana — by the Self; jahi - you slay, surmount,
conquer; satrum — the enemy; maha-baho — O mighty-armed, Arjuna; kama-
rupam — of the form of lust/desire; durasadam - hard to conquer.

Know "Him" (Atmd, the Self) who is beyond the intellect, subduing the self
(one 's own mind) by the Self. O mighty-armed (Arjuna), destroy the enemy
swift to change in the form of lust, hard to conquer. (3.43)

In the Upanisad of the Bhagavadglta, the knowledge of Brahman the
Supreme, the science of yoga, and the dialogue between Srlkrsna and
Arjuna, this is the third discourse entitled, "Karma Yoga".

Fourth Discourse

Jnana-Yoga

TRADITION OF JNANA-YOGA

sri-bhagavan uvaca
imam vivasvate yogam proktavan aham avyayam
vivasvan manave praha manur iksvakave 'bravit (4.01)

sri-bhagavan uvaca — the Supreme Lord (Krsna) said; imam — this; vivasvate —
unto the sun-god, Vivasvat; yogam — yoga; proktavan - taught, instructed; aham
— I; avyayam — imperishable; vivasvan — Vivasvat (the sun-god's name);
manave - to Manu; praha - taught, told; manuh — Manu; iksvakave — unto King
Iksvaku; abravit - taught, said.

The Supreme Lord said: I taught this changeless way of Yoga to Vivasvan;
Vivasvan told it to Manu and Manu to Iksvaku. (4.01)

evam parampara-praptam imam rajarsayo viduh
sa kaleneha mahata yogo nastah Parantapa (4.02)

evam — thus; parampara praptam - down in regular succession; praptam —
received; imam — this ; raja-rsayah — the royal sages; viduh - knew,
understood; sah - that, this; kalena — in the course (lapse) of time, considerable
time; iha - here, (in this world); mahata — great; yogah —yoga; nastah -
destroyed, ceased to be; parantapa — O Arjuna, subduer of the enemies, O
vanquisher of foes.

So, was the oral tradition from one to another handed on to the Royal Sages
who came to know it, O Parantapa (O vanquisher offoes/Arjuna); but, after
a considerable time, this teaching of Yoga ceased to be in the world. (4.02)

sa evayam maya te 'dya yogah proktah puratanah
bhakto 'si me sakha ceti rahasyam hy etad uttamam (4.03)

sah — the same; eva - even, even, certainly; ayam — this; maya — by Me; te — to
you; adya — today; yogah — yoga; proktah - has been taught (revealed);
puratanah - ancient, very old; bhaktah — devotee; asi — you are; me — My;
sakha — friend; ca - and, also; iti - thus, therefore; rahasyam - secret, mystery;
hi — for; etat — this; uttamam -best, first greatest, most elevated.

This same ancient Yoga has been revealed to you today by Me, because you
are My devotee and friend, for this is the Supreme Secret. (4.03)

DIVINE INCARNATIONS

arjuna uvaca
aparam bhavato janma param janma vivasvatah
katham etad vijaniyam tvam adau proktavan iti (4.04)

arjunah uvaca — Arjuna said; aparam- later; bhavatah — Your; janma — birth;
param - prior, superior; janma — birth; vivasvatah - Vivasvat (sun-god); katham
— how; etat — this; vijaniyam - am I to understand, shall I understand, how
should I understand; tvam — You; adau — in the beginning; proktavan - taught,
instructed; iti — thus.

Arjuna said: Your birth was later, and that of Visvasvan earlier. How
should I understand that You taught this Yoga in the beginning? (4.04)

sri-bhagavan uvaca
bahuni me vyatitani janmani tava car j una
tany aham veda sarvani na tvam vettha Parantapa (4.05)

sri-bhagavan uvaca -the Supreme Lord said; bahuni — many; me - My, of
Mine; vyatitani — have passed away; janmani — births; tava — of yours; ca -
and, also; arjuna — O Arjuna; tani - those, them; aham — I; veda — know;
sarvani — all; na — not; tvam — you; vettha — know; parantapa — O subduer of
the enemy, O vanquisher of foes, Arjuna.

The Supreme Lord said: Many births have I past through, as well as you
have, O Arjuna; all these I know, but you do not know them, O Parantapa
(O vanquisher of foes/ Arjuna). (4.05)

ajo 'pi sann avyayatma bhutanam isvaro 'pi san
prakrtim svam adhisthaya sambhavamy atma-mayaya (4.06)

ajah — unborn; api - also, as well; san — being; avyaya — without deterioration;
avyayatma — of imperishable nature; atma — body; bhutanam — of all those who
are born, beings, created things; isvarah — the Supreme Lord; api — also; san —
being so; prakrtim — nature; svam — of Myself, of My own; adhisthaya — being
so situated; sambhavami -come into being; atma-mayaya — by My internal
energy, by My own maya.

Though I am unborn, of imperishable nature, and though I am the Lord of
all created things, yet by My own nature, I am born through My own Maya
(the power of thought that produces form). (4.06)

THE PURPOSE OF DIVINE INCARNATIONS

yada yada hi dharmasya glanir bhavati bharata
abhyutthanam adharmasya tadatmanam srjamy aham (4.07)

yada yada — whenever and wherever; hi - surely, certainly; dharmasya — of
righteousness; glanih - decline, discrepancy; bhavati — is; bharata — O
descendant of Bharata, Arjuna; abhyutthanam - rise, predominance, growing
powerfully; adharmasya — unrighteousness; tada - then, at that time; atmanam -

- Myself; srjami — manifest; aham — I.

Whenever there is a decline of Dharma (righteousness) and Adharma
(unrighteousness) grows powerfully, then, O Bharata (Arjuna), I manifest
Myself. (4.07)

paritranaya sadhunam vinasaya ca duskrtam
dharma-samsthapanarthaya sambhavami yuge yuge (4.08)

paritranaya — for the protection; sadhunam — of the good; vinasaya — for the
annihilation, for the destruction; ca — and; duskrtam - of the wicked, of the
evildoers, of the miscreants; dharma — righteousness; samsthapana-arthaya -
for the establishment of righteousness; sambhavami - I am born, I do appear;
yuge — millennium; yuge — after millennium; yuge-yuge - in every age, from
age to age.

For the protection of the good, for the destruction of the evildoers, for the
establishment of righteousness, I am born from age to age. (See also Tr

janma karma ca me divyam evam yo vetti tattvatah
tyaktva deham punar janma naiti mam eti so 'rjuna (4.09)

janma — birth; karma - action, work; ca - and, also; me - My, of Mine; divyam

- divine; evam - thus; yah - who, anyone who; vetti — knows; tattvatah — in
reality, in true light; tyaktva - having abandoned, leaving aside; deham — the
body; punah — again; janma — birth; na - not, never; eti — comes; mam - to Me,
unto Me; eti - comes, does attain; sah — he; arjuna — O Arjuna.

He, who knows My divine birth and action (Karma), comes not to birth
again on leaving the body, he comes to Me, O Arjuna. (4.09)

JN ANA-YOGA IS THE SOLE MEANS TO MOKSHA

vita-raga-bhaya-krodha man-maya mam upasritah
bahavo jnana-tapasa puta mad-bhavam agatah (4.10)

vita — freed from; raga — attachment; bhaya — fear; krodhah — and anger; mat-
maya - absorbed in Me, fully in Me; mam — Me; upasritah - takinf refuge in;
bahavah — many; jnana — of knowledge; tapasa — by the penance; Jnana
tapasa — by the fire of knowledge; putah — purified; mad-bhavam - My Being;
agatah - have attained, have entered.

Freed from passion, fear and anger, absorbed in Me, taking refuge in Me,
purified by the fire (tapas) of knowledge, many have entered into My Being.
(4.10)

DIVINE DISPENSATION OF UNITY OF WORLD FAITHS AND

SALVATION

ye yatha mam prapadyante tarns tathaiva bhajamy aham
mama vartmanuvartante manusyah partha sarvasah (4.11)

ye — who; yatha - as, in whatever way; mam — Me; prapadyante - approach,
surrender; tan — them; tatha — so; eva — even; bhajami — reward; aham — I;
mama — My; vartma — path; anuvartante — follow; manusyah — men; partha —
O son of Prtha, Arjuna; sarvasah — in all respects, in all ways, on every side.

In whatever way men approach Me, in the same way do I return them, for
the path men take from every side is Mine, O Partha (Arjuna). (4.11)

kanksantah karmanam siddhim yajanta iha devatah
ksipram hi manuse loke siddhir bhavati karma-ja (4.12)

kanksantah - desiring, longing for; karmanam — of action; siddhim — success;
yajante - sacrifice (they worship by sacrifices); iha — in this world, in this world
of men; devatah - gods, devas, deities, demi-gods; ksipram — quickly; hi —
because; manuse — in the human; loke - (within this) world; siddhih — success;
bhavati - comes, is attained; karma-ja - born of action.

They who desire success in their actions worship here the deities, because
the fruit of such action comes quickly in this world of men. (4.12)

catur-varnyam maya srstam guna-karma-vibhagasah
tasya kartaram api mam viddhy akartaram avyayam (4.13)

catuh-varnyam - the fourfold caste, the four divisions of human society; maya —
by Me; srstam - has been created, created; guna — of quality, contingent, modes
of nature ; karma — and work; vibhagasah — in terms of division; guna-karma-
vibhagasah - according to the differentiation of Guna and karma; tasya — of
that, thereof; kartaram — the doer, the author, the father; api -though, although;
mam — Me; viddhi — know; akartaram — as the non-doer, actionless; avyayam -
immutable, unchangeable.

The four caste systems were generated by Me in agreement to the division
of energies and actions. Know Me to be the doer of them, though the
actionless and immutable. (See also 18.41) (4.13)

na mam karmani limpanti na me karma-phale sprha
iti mam yo 'bhijanati karmabhir na sa badhyate (4.14)

na - not, never; mam — Me; karmani — actions; limpanti — do affect; na — nor;
me — My; karma-phale - the fruit of action; sprha - desire, aspiration; iti —
thus; mam — Me; yah — who; abhijanati - knows, does know; karmabhih — by
actions; na - not, never; sah — he; badhyate - is bound, becomes entangled.

Actions can never affect Me, nor the yearning for their fruits. The one who
knows Me like this is not bound by actions. (4.14)

evam jnatva krtam karma purvair api mumuksubhih
kuru karmaiva tasmat tvam purvaih purvataram krtam (4.15)

evam — thus; jnatva - having known, knowing well; krtam - (was) performed,
done; karma - actions, work; purvaih - by ancients, by past authorities; api -
also, indeed; mumuksubhih - seekers after freedom, who attained liberation, in
the hope of liberation; kuru — perform; karma — action; eva — even; tasmat —
therefore; tvam — you; purvaih - by ancients; purva-taram — in ancient times,
days of old; krtam — as performed, done.

This knowing, the ancients too performed actions in the hope of liberation.
So, also you undertake action as the ancients did in the days of old. (4.15)

THE REAL NATURE OF ACTION AND INACTION

kim karma kim akarmeti kavayo 'py atra mohitah
tat te karma pravaksyami yaj jnatva moksyase 'subhat (4.16)

kim — what; karma — action; kim — what; akarma — inaction; iti — thus; kavayah
— the intelligent, the sages; api — also; atra — in this; mohitah - are confused,
are deluded, bewildered; tat — that; te — unto you; karma - action ; pravaksyami
- (I) shall teach, explain; yat — which; jnatva - having known, having
understood, knowing; moksyase — you shall be liberated; asubhat — from evil.

What is action? What is inaction? As to this, even the sages are confused. I
shall teach you that action, and once you have understood My words, you
shall be liberated from evil. (4.16)

karmano hy api boddhavyam boddhavyam ca vikarmanah
akarmanas ca boddhavyam gahana karmano gatih (4.17)

karmanah — of action; hi — for; api — also; boddhavyam — should be
understood, should be known; boddhavyam — should be understood, should be
known; ca - and, also; vikarmanah — of the forbidden action; akarmanah — of
inaction; ca - and, also; boddhavyam — should be understood, should be known;
gahana - profound, deep; karmanah — of action; gatih - the way, the path, the
entrance.

One must understand what is meant by action; discriminate unlawful
action, and what inaction is. Profound is the way of action. (4.17)

karmany akarma yah pasyed akarmani ca karma yah
sa buddhiman manusyesu sa yuktah krtsna-karma-krt (4.18)

karmani — in action; akarma - in inaction; yah — one who; pasyet - would see;
akarmani — in inaction; ca — also; karma — action; yah — who; sah — he;
buddhi-man — wise; manusyesu - among men; sah — he; yuktah — yogi; krtsna-
karma-krt - the performer of all action.

He who can see inaction in action, and action in inaction, he is wise among
men, integrated (yukta), he is the performer of all action. (See also 3.05;

WHO IS A SAGE OR AN ASCETIC?

yasya sarve samarambhah kama-sankalpa- varjitah
jnanagni-dagdha-karmanam tarn ahuh panditam budhah (4.19)

yasya — whose; sarve — all; samarambhah - initiatives, undertakings, attempts;
kama — based on desire for sense gratification; sankalpa — determination;
varjitah — are devoid of; kamasankalpa varjitah — free from desire and
purpose; jnana — of perfect knowledge; agni — by the fire; dagdha — burned;
karmnanam — whose work; jnanagni-dagdha-karmanam - whose actions have
been burnt by the fire of knowledge; tarn — him; ahuh — call; panditam - the
sage; budhah — those who know, the wise.

He whose initiatives are all free from desires and purposes, and whose
actions have been burnt by the fire of knowledge, the wise calls him a sage.
(4.19)

tyaktva karma-phalasangam nitya-trpto nirasrayah
karmany abhipravrtto 'pi naiva kincit karoti sah (4.20)

tyaktva — having abandoned, given up; karma-phala-asangam — attachment to
the fruits of action; nitya — always; trptah — being satisfied; nitya-trptah - ever
content; nirasrayah — without any shelter, depending on nothing; karmani — in
actions; abhipravrttah — always engaged; api - though, even, in spite of; na —
not; eva - verily, truly; kincit — anything; karoti — do; sah — he.

Having abandoned attachment to the fruits of action, ever content,
depending on nothing, though always engaged in actions, he is not doing
anything. (4.20)

THE SAGE'S ACTION FOR BODILY MAINTENANCE

nirasir yata-cittatma tyakta-sarva-parigrahah
sariram kevalam karma kurvan napnoti kilbisam (4.21)

nirasih — without desire, without hope; yata — controlled; citta-atma — mind
and intelligence; yata-cittatma - one with the mind and self-controlled; tyakta —
giving up; sarva — all; parigrahah — sense of proprietorship over possessions;
tyakta-sarva-parigrahah - having abandoned all possessions, becoming free
from all possessions; sariram — bodily; kevalam - only, merely; karma —
action; kurvan — doing; na - not, never; apnoti — does obtains, acquire; kilbisam
— sin.

Having given up desire, restraining his mind and senses, becoming free
from all possessions, performing action as is needed for the body
maintenance, he does not commit sin. (4.21)

yadrccha-labha-santusto dvandvatito vimatsarah
samah siddhav asiddhau ca krtvapi na nibadhyate (4.22)

yadrccha-labha-santusto - content with what comes of its own accord; yadrccha

— out of its own accord; labha — with gain; santustah — satisfied; dvandvatitah

- free of the pairs of opposites; dvandva - duality; atitah — surpassed;
vimatsarah — free from envy; samah - steady, even minded; siddhau — in
success; asiddhau - in failure; ca - and, also; krtva - acting, doing; api - even,
although; na - not, never; nibadhyate - is bound.

Content with what comes of its own accord, surmounting all dualities,
knowing no envy, equally in success and failure, though acting he is not
bound. (4.22)

gata-sangasya muktasya jnanavasthita-cetasah
yajnayacaratah karma samagram praviliyate (4.23)

gata-sangasya — of one unattached to the modes of material nature; muktasya —
of the liberated; jnana-avasthita cetasah -whose mind is established in
knowledge; yajnaya — for the sake of Yajna (sacrifice); acaratah — acting;
karma — action; samagram — whole; praviliyate - melts away, is dissolved,
merges entirely.

Man's attachment gone, is liberation won, whose mind is established in
knowledge, and who performs action for the sake of sacrifice (selfless
service), his whole action melts away. (4.23)

KNOWLEDGE-SACRIFICE

brahmarpanam brahma havir brahmagnau brahmana hutam
brahmaiva tena gantavyam brahma-karma-samadhina (4.24)

brahma — Brahman; arpanam - the offering, the oblation; brahma — Brahman;
havih - the clarified butter; brahmagnau — in the fire of Brahman; brahmana —
by Brahman; hutam - is offered; brahma — Brahman; eva — only; tena — by
him; gantavyam — to be reached; brahma karma samadhina - by the one who is
absorbed (or, 'fixes his mind') in action which is Brahman; samadhina —
absorption.

The offering is Brahman; Brahman is the clarified butter, offered by
Brahman in Brahman's fire. He who fixes his mind (samddhi) on Brahman,
indwelt by Brahman, to Brahman he must go. (Also see 9.16) (4.24)

SACRIFICES WROUGHT BY ACTION

daivam evapare yajnam yoginah paryupasate
brahmagnav apare yajnam yajnenaivopajuhvati (4.25)

daivam — in worshiping the devas; eva — only; apare — some; yajnam —
sacrifices; yoginah — yogis; paryupasate - offer, perform; brahmagnau — in the
fire of Brahman; apare — others; yajnam — sacrifice; yajnena — by sacrifice; eva
— thus; upajuhvati - offer as sacrifice.

Some yogis offer sacrifices to the deities; others sacrifice (selfless service)
only by pouring sacrifice into the fire of Brahman. (4.25)

anye samyamagnisu juhvati
sabdadin visayan any a indriyagnisu juhvati (4.26)

srotra-adini — such as the hearing process; indriyani — senses;
srotradinindriyany - organ of hearing and other senses; anye — others;
samyamagnisu — in the fire of restraint; juhvati — offer; sabda-adin — sound
vibration, etc.; visayan — objects of sense gratification; sabdadin visayan -
sense objects as sound, etc.; anye — others; indriya — of the sense organs; agnisu

— in the fire; indriyagnisu — in the fire of the senses; juhvati — they sacrifice.

Some others offer the hearing, the senses and the rest in the fires of
restraint; others the senses' proper objects as sound and the like in the fires
of the senses. (4.26)

sarvanindriya-karmani prana-karmani capare
atma-samyama-yogagnau juhvati jnana-dipite (4.27)

sarvani — all; indriya — the senses; karmani — functions; prana-karmani —
functions of the life breath (vital energy); ca - and, also; apare — others; atma-
samyama — of controlling the mind; yoga — the linking process; agnau — in the
fire of; atma-samyama-yogagnau - in the fire of the yoga of mental control;
juhvati - offer, sacrifice; jnana-dipite - kindled by knowledge.

Still others offer all the functions of the senses and of the vital forces into
the fire of Yoga of mental control, kindled by knowledge. (4.27)

dravya-yajnas tapo-yajna yoga-yajnas tathapare
svadhyaya-jnana-yajnas ca yatayah samsita-vratah (4.28)

dravya-yajnah - those who offer wealth as sacrifice; tapah-yajnah - offering
sacrifice in austerities; yoga-yajnah - those who offer yoga as sacrifice; tatha -
thus, again; apare — others; svadhyaya jnana-yajnah - those who offer study
and knowledge as sacrifice; ca - and, also; yatayah - ascetics or anchorites,
hermits; samsita-vratah — persons of severe vows.

Others offer up their wealth, others through austerity or their practice of
Yoga as sacrifice, while ascetics (sages of severe vows) make study and
knowledge (of Scripture) their sacrifice. (4.28)

apane juhvati pranam prane 'panam tathapare
pranapana-gati ruddhva pranayama-parayanah (4.29)

apane — in the incoming breath; juhvati - offer, sacrifice; pranam - outgoing
breath; prane - in the outgoing breath; apanam - incoming breath; tatha - thus,
as also; apare — others; pranapanagati - courses of the outgoing and incoming
breaths; ruddhva — restraining; prana-ayama-parayanah - exclusively absorbed
in the restraint of breath.

Yet others offer as sacrifice the outgoing breath (Prdna) in the incoming
breath (Apdna), and the incoming breath (Apdna) in the outgoing breath
(Prdna), on breath control intend (prdndydma). (4.29)

apare niyataharah pranan pranesu juhvati
sarve 'py ete yajna-vido yajna-ksapita-kalmasah (4.30)

apare — others; niyata — having controlled; aharah — eating; niyataharah - of
regulated food; pranan - life breaths; pranesu — in the life breaths; juhvati -
sacrifice; sarve — all; api — also; ete — these; yajna-vidah - knowers of
sacrifice; yajna-ksapita — being cleansed as the result of such performances;
kalmasah — of sinful reactions; yajna-ksapita-kalmasah - for sins are destroyed
by sacrifice.

Others regulate their food, and offer up breaths in breaths (their Prdna into
Prdna). All these are knowers of sacrifice, for by sacrifice they have
destroyed their sins. (4.30)

yajna-sistamrta-bhujo yanti brahma sanatanam
nayam loko 'sty ayajnasya kuto 'nyah kuru-sattama (4.31)

yajna-sistamrta-bhujo — eaters of the food of immortality - the leavings of the
sacrifice; yajna-sista — of the result of such performances of sacrifice (yajna);
amrta-bhujah — those who have tasted such nectar; yanti - go, attain, do
approach; brahma — Brahman; sanatanam — eternal; na - not, never; ayam —
this; lokah - world; asti — is; ayajnasya — for one who performs no sacrifice;
kutah — how; anyah — other; kuru-sat-tama — O best amongst the Kurus,
Arjuna.

Eating the leavings of the sacrifice, the food of immortality (amrti), attain
the eternal Brahman. This world is not from him who performs no
sacrifice, how then the other world, O best among the Kurus (Arjuna)? (See
also 4.38 and 5.06) (4.31)

evam bahu-vidha Yajna vitata brahmano mukhe
karma-jan viddhi tan sarvan evam jnatva vimoksyase (4.32)

evam — thus; bahu-vidhah — various kinds of, manifold; yajnah — sacrifices;
vitatah — are spread; brahmanah — of the Vedas, or of Brahman; mukhe —
through the mouth; karma-jan — born of action; viddhi — you should know; tan -
- them; sarvan — all; evam — thus; jnatva - knowing, having known; vimoksyase
— you will be liberated.

So many and various are the sacrifices set forth at the mouth of Brahman.
Know that they are all born of action, for when you know this you shall be
liberated. (See also 3.14) (4.32)

KNOWLEDGE SACRIFICE IS BETTER THAN OTHER SACRIFICES

sreyan dravya-mayad yajnaj jnana-yajnah parantapa
sarvam karmakhilam Partha jnane parisamapyate (4.33)

sreyan -superior, greater; dravya-mayat — of material objects; yajnat — than the
sacrifice; jnana-yajnah — sacrifice in knowledge; parantapa - O Parantapa, O
chastiser of the enemy, Arjuna; sarvam — all; karma — action; akhilam — in
totality, or in its entirety, all action without exception; partha — O son of Prtha,
Arjuna; jnane — in knowledge; parisamapyate - culminated, merged.

Superior is the sacrifice of knowledge than the sacrifice of material objects,
O Parantapa (O Vanquisher of foes/Arjuna). All action, without exception, O
Partha (Arjuna), finds their merging in knowledge. (4.33)

tad viddhi pranipatena pariprasnena sevaya
upadeksyanti te jnanam jnaninas tatt va-darsinah (4.34)

tat — that; viddhi - know this, try to understand; pranipatena - by discipleship
in humble reverence, by long prosternation; pariprasnena — by questioning,
inquiries; sevaya — by the rendering of service; upadeksyanti - will teach, will
instruct; te — you; jnanam — into knowledge; jnaninah — the wise; tattva — of
the truth; darsinah - seers; tatt va-darsinah - those who have realised the Truth.

Learn to know this by discipleship (in humble reverence), by questioning,
and by service. For the wise ones of Truth who see things as they really are,
will teach you wisdom. (4.34)

yaj jnatva na punar moham evam yasyasi pandava
yena bhutany asesani draksyasy atmany atho mayi (4.35)

yat — which; jnatva - having known, knowing; na - not, never; punah — again;
moham - confusion, delusion, to illusion; evam - thus, like this; yasyasi - will
get, you shall go; pandava — O son of Pandu, Arjuna; yena - by this, by which;
bhutani - beings, living entities; asesani — all; draksyasi — you will see; atmani
— in yourself; athau - also, and then; mayi — in Me.

Once you have known this, you will never more be the subject to such
confusion, O Pandava (Arjuna), for by this you will see all beings without
exception in yourself (yes, everyone), and then in Me. (See also 6.29, 6.30,

api ced asi papebhyah sarvebhyah papa-krt-tamah
sarvam jnana-plavenaiva vrjinam santarisyasi (4.36)

api — even; cet — if; asi — you are; papebhyah - among evil-doers, of sinners;
sarvebhyah — of all; papa-krt-tamah - the very worst among, the greatest sinner,
most sinful; sarvam — all such sinful reactions; jnana-plavena - in this boat of
knowledge, (by the raft of knowledge); eva — alone; vrjinam — sin; santarisyasi
— you will cross (you will sail across).

Even if you were the very worst among evil-doers, you will sail across all sin
in this boat of knowledge. (4.36)

yathaidhamsi samiddho 'gnir bhasma-sat kurute 'rjuna
jnanagnih sarva-karmani bhasma-sat kurute tatha (4.37)

yatha- as; edhamsi — firewood; samiddhah — blazing; agnih — fire; bhasma-sat
— reduced to ashes; kurute - does, makes, turns; arjuna — O Arjuna; jnana-
agnih — the fire of knowledge; sarva-karmani -all actions; bhasma-sat — to
ashes; kurute - makes, it turns (reduce); tatha - so.

As a kindled fire reduces firewood to ashes, O Arjuna, so does the
knowledge fire reduce all actions to ashes. (4.37)

na hi jnanena sadrsam pavitram iha vidyate
tat svayam yoga-samsiddhah kalenatmani vindati (4.38)

na — nothing; hi - truly, verily; jnanena - as knowledge; sadrsam — like;
pavitram - pure, perfected, sanctified; iha — in (this world, on earth); vidyate -
is; tat — that; svayam - himself, oneself; yoga — yoga; samsiddhah — he who is
mature; yoga-samsiddhah - perfected in yoga; kalena - in time, in course of
time; atmani — in himself; vindati — enjoys.

Nothing on earth is as purifying as knowledge. He who is perfected by Yoga
finds this in time of his own accord in himself and by himself. (See also 4.31,

THE SUREST MEANS TO KNOWLEDGE

sraddhaval labhate jnanam tat-parah samyatendriyah
jnanam labdhva param santim acirenadhigacchati (4.39)

sraddha-van - a man of faith, a faithful man; labhate - attains, obtains,
achieves; jnanam — knowledge; tat-parah - intended, devoted, very much
attached to it; samyata - subdued, controlled; indriyah — senses;
samyatendriyah — who has subdued the senses; jnanam — knowledge; labdhva -
- having achieved, attained, obtained; param — supreme; santim — peace;
acirena - at once; adhigacchati — attains.

A man of faith, intended on knowledge, his senses subdued, attains it, and
having attained it, attains at once the supreme peace. (4.39)

KNOWLEDGE THE KILLER OF DOUBT

ajnas casraddadhanas ca samsayatma vinasyati
nayam loko sti na paro na sukham samsayatmanah (4.40)

ajnah - an unwise man, the ignorant; ca — and; asraddadhanah — without faith,
the faithless; ca - and, also; samsaya — of doubts; atma — a person; samsayatma

- the doubting mind, the doubting self; vinasyati - is ruined, goes to
destruction, falls back; na - not, never; ay am — this; lokah — world; asti — is;
na - not, nor; parah — in the next, the one after; na — not; sukham — happiness;
samsaya — doubtful; atmanah — of the person; samsayatmanah - for who
doubts, for the doubting self.

The man, unwise, without faith, of a doubting mind, is ruined. For who
doubts, there is neither this world, nor the one after, nor any happiness.
(4.40)

yoga-sannyasta-karmanam jnana-sanchinna-samsayam
atmavantam na karmani nibadhnanti Dhananjaya (4.41)

yoga — yoga; sannyasta — one who has renounced; karmanam — the fruits of
actions; yoga-sannyasta-karmanam - one who renounced action by Yoga;
jnana — by knowledge; sanchinna — cut; samsayam — doubts; jnana-sanchinna-
samsayam - one whose doubts have been destroyed by knowledge; atma-
vantam - who has realised himself, possessing the self; na - not, never; karmani
— actions; nibadhnanti — bind; dhananjaya - O Dhananjaya, O conqueror of
riches, Arjuna.

O Dhannanjaya (Arjuna), he who has renounced actions by Yoga (spiritual
discipline), whose doubts have been destroyed by knowledge, who has
realised himself, actions bind him not. (4.41)

tasmad ajnana-sambhutam hrt-stham jnanasinatmanah
chittvainam samsayam yogam atisthottistha Bharata (4.42)

tasmat — therefore; ajnana-sambhutam - born out of ignorance; hrt-stham -
(residing) in the heart; jnana — of knowledge; asina — by the weapon; jnanasina
- by the sword of knowledge; atmanah — of the self; chittva - having cut,
cutting off; enam — this; samsayam — doubt; yogam — yoga; atistha - take
refuge; uttistha — stand up, arise; bharata - O Bharata, O descendant of Bharata,
Arjuna.

And so, with the sword of knowledge (of the Self), cut this doubt of you
which through ignorance is still lurking in your heart, take refuge in yoga
and stand up, O Bharata (Arjuna). (4.42)

In the Upanisad of the Bhagavadglta, the knowledge of Brahman the
Supreme, the science of yoga, and the dialogue between Srlkrsna and
Arjuna, this is the fourth discourse entitled, "Jnana- Yoga".


Fifth Discourse

Samnyasa-Yoga

arjuna uvaca
sannyasam karmanam Krsna punar yogam ca samsasi
yac chreya etayor ekam tan me bruhi su-niscitam (5.01)

arjunah uvaca — Arjuna said; sannyasam — renunciation; karmanam — of
actions; krsna — O Krsna; punah — again; yogam — yoga; ca - and, also;
samsasi - (You) praise; yat — which; sreyah — better; etayoh — of these two;
ekam — one; tat — that; me — to me; bruhi — tell; su-niscitam - decisively,
definitely.

Arjuna said: You now praise renunciation of actions, O Krsna, and again
Yoga. Tell me decisively which of the two is better. (See also 5.05) (5.01)

sri-bhagavan uvaca
sannyasah karma-yogas ca nihsreyasa-karav ubhau
tayos tu karma-sannyasat karma-yogo visisyate (5.02)

sri-bhagavan uvaca - The Supreme Lord said; sannyasah — renunciation;
karma-yogah - yoga of action; ca - and, also; nihsreyasa-karau — leading to the
highest bliss; ubhau — both; tayoh — of the two; tu — but; karma-sannyasat -
than renunciation of action; karma-yogah - yoga of action; visisyate — is
superior.

The Supreme Lord said: Renunciation of actions and Yoga (selfless action),
both lead to the highest bliss; but of the two, Yoga of action is superior to
renunciation of action. (5.02)

jneyah sa nitya-sannyasi yo na dvesti na kanksati
nirdvandvo hi maha-baho sukham bandhat pramucyate (5.03)

jneyah — should be known; sah — he; nitya — always; sonny asi — renouncer;
nitya-sannyasi - perpetual ascetic, steady ascetic; yah — who; na - not, neither,
never; dvesti — hates; na — nor; kanksati — desires; nirdvandvah — free from all
dualities, free from the pairs of opposites; hi - verily, surely, certainly; maha-
baho — O mighty-armed, Arjuna; sukham — easily; bandhat — from bondage;
pramucyate — is set free.

He should be known as a perpetual ascetic (Sannydsi, one renouncing all),
who neither hates nor desires, for surmounting all dualities (free from the
pairs of opposites), O Mighty-armed (Arjuna), he gains easily release from
bondage. (5.03)

SANKHYA AND YOGA LEAD TO THE SAME GOAL

sankhya-yogau prthag balah pravadanti na panditah
ekam apy asthitah samyag ubhayor vindate phalam (5.04)

sankhya — philosophical system (propounded by the sage Kapila); yogau —
yoga; sankhya-yogau - Sankhya (knowledge) and yoga (yoga of action or
performance of action); prthak- different, distinct; balah - the simple-minded,
the less intelligent, as children; pravadanti — say; na - not, never; panditah —
the wise; ekam — one; api — even; asthitah — being situated, established in;
samyak - truly, earnestly; ubhayoh — of both; vindate — obtains; phalam — the
benefit.

The simple-minded, not the wise, say of Sankhya (theory, knowledge) and
Yoga (practise) as different. Applying oneself to one earnestly, obtains the
benefits of both. (5.04)

yat sankhyaih prapyate sthanam tad yogair api gamyate
ekam sankhyam ca yogam ca yah pasyati sa pasyati (5.05)

yat — that; sankhyaih — by means of the Sankhya philosophy; prapyate — is
reached, attained; sthanam — place; tat — that; yogaih — by the Yogis (karma
yogis); api — also; gamyate - is attained, reached; ekam — one; sankhyam —
analytical knowledge of the Sankhyas; ca — and; yogam - yoga (performance of
action); ca — and; yah — who; pasyati — sees; sah — he; pasyati - really sees.

The state which is attained by Sankhyas is also reached by the Yogis. He
sees, who sees Sankhya (theory, knowledge) and Yoga (practise) as one. (See
also 6.01 and 6.02) (5.05)

KARMA-YOGA IS A MEANS TO SAMNYASA

sannyasas tu maha-baho duhkham aptum ayogatah
yoga-yukto munir brahma na cirenadhigacchati (5.06)

sannyasah —renunciation; tu — but; maha-baho — O mighty-armed, Arjuna;
duhkham — hard; aptum - to attain; ayogatah — without the practise of yoga;
yoga-yuktah — one engaged in yoga, well-versed and integrated; munih - Muni,
a Sage; brahma — Brahman; na cirena - soon, quickly, without delay;
adhigacchati - reaches, goes, attains.

Hard to attain is renunciation, O mighty-armed (Arjuna) without the
practise of Yoga. A sage well-versed and integrated in Yogic exercise (yoga-
yukta) soon reaches Brahman. (See also 4.31, 4.38 and 5.08) (5.06)

A SA GE 'S A CTIONS DO NOT INFL UENCE HIM

yoga-yukto visuddhatma vijitatmajitendriyah
sarva-bhutatma-bhutatma kurvann api na lipyate (5.07)

yoga-yuktah -equipped with yoga, devoted to the path of action; visuddha-atma

- a man of purified mind, a purified living entity; vijita-atma — self-controlled,
one who has conquered the self; jita-indriyah - one who has subdued his senses;
sarva-bhuta — to all living entities; atma-bhuta-atma — compassionate; sarva-
bhutatma-bhutatma - one who realises his own self equally as the Self in all
beings; kurvan api - even acting; na - not, never; lipyate — is affected,
entangled, tainted.

He who is equipped with yoga, whose mind is pure and senses subdued,
whose Self has become the Self of all beings, is not affected by actions even
though he acts. (5.07)

A SA GE 'S A CTIONS ARE RE ALL Y NO A CTIONS
naiva kincit karomiti yukto manyeta tattva-vit
pasyan srnvan sprsanjighrann asnan gacchan svapan svasan (5.08)

pralapan visrjan grhnann unmisan nimisann api
indriyanindriyarthesu vartanta iti dharayan (5.09)

na - not, never; eva — even; kincit — anything; karomi — I do; iti — thus; yuktah

- yogi; manyeta — thinks; tattva-vit — one who knows the truth, the knower of
truth; pasyan — seeing; srn van — hearing; sprsan — touching; jighran —
smelling; asnan — eating; gacchan — going; svapan — sleeping; svasan —
breathing; pralapan - speaking, talking; visrjan — giving up, letting go; grhnan

- grasping, accepting; unmisan - opening (the eyes); nimisan - closing (the
eyes); api - also, in spite of; indriyani — the senses; indriya-arthesu - among the
sense-objects; vartante - act among, move among; iti — thus; dharayan -
considering, believing, being convinced.

"Look, nothing do I do", so thinks the integrated (yukta) one (Sannydsi),
who knows the essence of things, and not seeing, hearing, touching,
smelling, eating, going, sleeping, breathing, talking, giving, grasping,
opening and closing the eyes, he believes: "The senses only act among their
proper objects." (See also 3.27, 13.29, and 14.19) (5.08-09)

brahmany adhaya karmani sangam tyaktva karoti yah
lipyate na sa papena padma-patram ivambhasa (5.10)

brahmani - in Brahman; adhaya - having placed; karmani — actions; sangam —
attachment; tyaktva - having abandoned, giving up; karoti - acts, performs; yah
— who; lipyate — is tainted, affected; na - not, never; sah — he; papena — by sin;
padma-patram - lotus pedal, leaf; iva — like; ambhasa — by the water.

He who acts, offering all actions to Brahman (the Supreme, the Self-existent),
abandoning attachment, is not affected by sin, as a lotus pedal by water.

(5.10)

kayena manasa buddhya kevalair indriyair api
yoginah karma kurvanti sangam tyaktvatma-suddhaye (5.11)

kayena — with the body; manasa — with the mind; buddhya — with the intellect;
kevalaih — only; indriyaih — with the senses; api - also, even; yoginah — yogis;
karma — actions; kurvanti — perform; sangam — attachment; tyaktva - having
abandoned, without ...; atma — of the self; suddhaye — for the purpose of
purification; atma-suddhaye — for the purification of the self .

Yogis perform action without attachment, merely using the body, the mind,
the intellect, and even the senses, for purification of the self. (5.11)

yuktah karma-phalam tyaktva santim apnoti naisthikim
ayuktah kama-karena phale sakto nibadhyate (5.12)

yuktah -the integrated one, the united one (the well-poised); karma-phalam -
fruits of action; tyaktva - having abandoned, renounced; santimn - abiding
peace; apnoti — attains; naisthikim — final; ayuktah - the non-united one; kama-
karena -prompted by desire; phale — in the fruit (of action); saktah — attached;
nibadhyate - is bound.

The integrated one having renounced the fruit of actions attains the abiding
peace. The one not integrated, whose actions are prompted by desire,
attached to its fruits, is bound. (5.12)

sarva-karmani manasa sannyasyaste sukham vasi
nava-dvare pure dehi naiva kurvan na karayan (5.13)

sarva — all; karmani — actions; manasa — by the mind; sannyasya - having
renounced; aste — rests; sukham — in happiness, resting serenely; vast — one
who is controlled; nava-dvare — in the place where there are nine gates, in the
nine-gated; pure — in the city; dehi — the embodied; na - not, never; eva — even;
kurvan — acting; na — not; karayan — causing to act.

The embodied one who has won full control over the senses, in thought
having renounced all action, rests serenely in the nine-gated city (the body),
neither acting or causing to act. (5.13)

NATURE IS THE SOURCE OF ACTIVITY

na kartrtvam na karmani lokasya srjati prabhuh
na karma-phala-samyogam svabhavas tu pravartate (5.14)

na - not, never; kartrtvam - agency, proprietorship; na — nor; karmani —
actions; lokasya - of the world, of the people; srjati — creates; prabhuh - the
Lord; na - not, nor; karma-phala samyogam - union with the fruits of actions,
bond that works to fruit conjoins; svabhavah — the modes of material nature; tu -
- but; pravartate - act, leading to action.

The Lord of the world does not engender the idea of agency or objects of
actions, nor the bond that works to fruit conjoins; it is Nature (svabhdva)
that performs this. (5.14)

KNOWLEDGE AND IGNORANCE

nadatte kasyacit papam na caiva sukrtam vibhuh
ajnanenavrtam jnanam tena muhyantijantavah (5.15)

na - not, never; adatte — accepts; kasyacit - of anyone; papam - evil, sin; na -
not, nor; ca - and, also; eva — even; su-krtam - good, merit; vibhuh — the Lord;
ajnanena — by ignorance; avrtam - enclosed, covered; jnanam — knowledge;
tena — by that; muhyanti — are fooled, bewildered, deluded; jantavah - beings,
mortals, the living entities.

The Lord accepts neither the evil nor even the good deed of anyone at all.
Knowledge is enclosed by ignorance; thereby are mortals fooled. (5.15)

jnanena tu tad ajnanam yesam nasitam atmanah
tesam aditya-vajjnanam prakasayati tat param (5.16)

jnanena — by knowledge; tu — but; tat — that; ajnanam - ignorance, nescience;
yesam — whose; nasitam — is destroyed; atmanah — of the Self; tesam — their;
aditya-vat — like the sun; jnanam — knowledge; prakasayati - discloses, reveals;
tatparam - "That" (tat), the Supreme.

But those whose ignorance is destroyed by knowledge of the Self: their
knowledge, is like the sun, shedding light on "That" (tat), the Supreme
(Brahman). (5.16)

THE SAGE HAS NO MORE BIRTHS

tad-buddhayas tad-atmanas tan-nisthas tat-parayanah
gacchanty apunar-avrttim jnana-nirdhuta-kalmasah (5.17)

tat-buddhayah - intellect merged in 'That'; tat-atmanah — those whose minds
are always in the Supreme, their self being 'That'; tat-nisthah - established in
'That'; tat-parayanah - with 'That' for their supreme goal; gacchanti — go;
apunah-avrttim - not again returning, where there is no return; jnana — by
knowledge; nirdhuta — cleansed; kalmasah - misgivings, sins; jnana-nirdhuta-
kalmasah — those whose sins have been washed away by knowledge.

Thinking on That (the Supreme), merged in That, established in That,
devoted to That alone, they step to the state from which there is no return,
their sins washed away by knowledge. (5.17)

THE SAGE SEES THE ONE IN ALL BEINGS

vidya-vinaya-sampanne brahmane gavi hastini
suni caiva sva-pake ca panditah sama-darsinah (5.18)

vidya - learning, with education; vinaya — humility; sampanne - endowed, fully
equipped; brahmane - in a brahmana; gavi — in the cow; hastini — in the
elephant; suni — in the dog; ca — and; eva — even; sva-pake - an outcaste; ca —
and; panditah — sages; sama-darsinah — who see with equal vision, who see the
selfsame thing, seeing equality.

Sages see the selfsame thing (sama) in a Brahmana (priest, intellectual class
in India) with learning and humility, as in a cow or elephant, also in a dog,
or even an outcast. (See also 6.29) (5.18)

THE SAGE IS LIBERATED WHILE STILL ON EARTH

ihaiva tairjitah sargo yesam samye sthitam manah
nirdosam hi samam brahma tasmad brahmani te sthitah (5.19)

iha - here, in this life; eva — even; taih — by them; jitah - is conquered; sargah -
- creation; yesam — whose; samye — in equality; sthitam - established, situated,
stilled; manah — mind; nirdosam - spotless, devoid of; hi - certainly, indeed;
samam — in equanimity, equal; brahma - in Brahman; tasmat — therefore;
brahmani — in Brahman; te — they; sthitah — are situated, standing still,
established.

Even here on earth, the created is conquered by them whose mind is stilled
in equality. For Brahman is devoid of imperfection and ever the same
(sama); therefore, they stand still in Brahman. (See also 18.55 and ChU

THE SAGE IS FREE FROM GRIEF AND REJOICING

na prahrsyet priyam prapya nodvijet prapya capriyam
sthira-buddhir asammudho brahma-vid brahmani sthitah (5.20)

na - not, never; prahrsyet — rejoices; priyam — the pleasant; prapya - attaining,
achieving; na — not; udvijet - should be troubled, become agitated; prapya -
having obtained, obtaining; ca - and, also; apriyam — the unpleasant; sthira-
buddhih — self-intelligent, one with steady intellect, steadfast and stilled (in
mind); asammudhah - undeluded, unconfused, unbewildered; brahma-vit — one
who knows Brahman; brahmani — in Brahman; sthitah - established, situated.

He who knows Brahman never rejoices in attaining some pleasant thing,
nor grieves when the unpleasant comes his way; steadfast and stilled his
mind unconfused, that knower of Brahman (Supreme Being) is established
in Brahman. (5.20)

THE SA GE 'S INFINITE JOY

bahya-sparsesv asaktatma vindaty atmani yat sukham
sa brahma-yoga-yuktatma sukham aksayam asnute (5.21)

bahy a- sparse su — in external sense pleasure, or contacts; asakta-atma — one
who is not attached; vindati — finds; atmani — in the Self; yat - (that) which;
sukham — happiness; sah — he; brahma-yoga — by concentration in Brahman;
yukta-atma — self-connected; brahma-yoga-yuktatma — with the Self engaged

in the contemplation of Brahman; sukham — happiness; aksayam - unending,
endless, unlimited; asnute — enjoys.

His self detached from contacts with the outside world, finds the joy (sukha)
which is in the Self, having the self engaged in the contemplation of
Brahman, he attains unending bliss. (5.21)

ye hi samsparsa-ja bhoga duhkha-yonaya eva te
ady-antavantah Kaunteya na tesu ramate budhah (5.22)

ye - those, (which); hi - verily, assuredly, certainly; samsparsa-jah — by contact
with the material senses, contact-born; bhogah — enjoyments; duhkha — distress;
yonayah — sources of; duhkha-yonaya - generators opf pain; eva — only; te —
they; adi — beginning; anta — end; vantah — subject to; ady-antavantah —
having a beginning and an end; kaunteya — O son of Kunti, Arjuna; na - not,
never; tesu — in those, in these, in them; ramate — rejoice; budhah — the
intelligent person, the wise one.

For the pleasures that are contact-born, assuredly give rise to pain, having
a beginning and an end, O son of Kunti (Arjuna), in these a wise man does
not rejoice. (See also 18.38) (5.22)

THE PA TH OF NIR VAN A

saknotihaiva yah sodhum prak sarira-vimoksanat
kama-krodhodbhavam vegam sa yuktah sa sukhi narah (5.23)

saknoti — is able; iha eva - (here) in this world; yah - one (he) who; sodhum —
to withstand; prak — before; sarira — the body; vimoksanat — giving up; sarira-
vimoksanat - liberation from the body; kama — desire; krodha — and anger;
udbhavam — generated from; krodhodbhavam — the impulse of desire and
anger; vegam — impulse; sah — he; yuktah - yogi; sah - he; sukhi — happy;
narah - man, human being

He who can even in this world withstand, before the release from the body,
the impulse of desire and anger, he is a yogi, and a happy man. (5.23)

yo 'ntah-sukho 'ntar-aramas tathantar-jyotir eva yah
sa yogi brahma-nirvanam brahma-bhuto 'dhigacchati (5.24)

yah — who; antah-sukhah — happy from within, finding his bliss within; antah-
aramah — strongly enjoying within; tatha - also, as well as; antah-jyotih —
aiming within, one who is illuminated within, who has found his light within;
eva — even; yah — who; sah — that; yog/ — yogi; brahma-nirvanam — liberation
in the Supreme, absolute freedom; brahma-bhutah - becoming Brahman;
adhigacchati — attains

He who is joyful within, who has also found his bliss and light within, such a
yogi attains Brahman, draws close to Nirvana that is Brahman too. (5.24)

labhante brahma-nirvanam rsayah ksina-kalmasah
chinna-dvaidha yatatmanah sarva-bhuta-hite ratah (5.25)

labhante - attain, obtain, achieve; brahma-nirvanam — liberation in the
Supreme, absolute freedom; rsayah -the seers, the rishis; ksina-kalmasah -
whose sins are destroyed; chinna — having torn off; dvaidhah — duality; chinna-
dvaidha - whose dualities are torn asunder, whose doubts are dispelled; yata-
atmanah - those who are self-controlled; sarva-bhuta — for all living entities;
hite — in welfare work; sarva-bhuta-hite - in the welfare of all beings; ratah —
attains.

The seers, their sins destroyed, their doubts dispelled, self-controlled and
intent upon the welfare of all beings, attain Nirvana of Brahman

(brahanirvdnam). (5.25)

kama-krodha-vimuktanam yatinam yata-cetasam
abhito brahma-nirvanam vartate viditatmanam (5.26)

kama — from desires; krodha — and anger; vimuktanam — of those who are
liberated; kama-krodha-vimuktanam - of those who are free from desire and
anger; yatinam — of the self-controlled; yata-cetasam — who have full control
over the mind, who have their mind under control; abhitah - on all sides;
brahma-nirvanam — liberation in the Supreme, absolute freedom; vartate -
conduct, behaviour, being established; vidita-atmanam — of those who have
known the Self, who have realised the Self.

Those devotees who are free from desire and anger, who have their mind
under control, and who have known the Self (have Self-knowledge), are
established in Brahma-nirvana. (5.26)

sparsan krtva bahir bahyams caksus caivantare bhruvoh
pranapanau samau krtva nasabhyantara-carinau (5.27)

yatendriya-mano-buddhir munir moksa-parayanah
vigateccha-bhaya-krodho yah sada mukta eva sah (5.28)

sparsan - contacts, ( as sense objects, such as sound); krtva — rendering; bahih -
outside, external; bahyan — outside; caksuh - eyes (gaze); ca - and, also; eva —
even; antare - in the middle, between; bhruvoh — the eyebrows; prana-apanau -

- the inward coming and outward coming breaths; samau — equal; krtva -
having made; nasa-abhyantara — within the nostrils; carinau — blowing;
nasabhyantara-carinau — moving inside the nostrils; yata — controlled; indriya

— senses; manah — mind; buddhih — intelligence; yatendriya-mano-buddhir —
with senses, mind and intellect controlled; munih — the sage; moksa — for
liberation; parayanah — being so destined; moksa-parayanah - having liberation
as one's supreme goal; vigata — having discarded; iccha — wishes; bhaya —
fear; krodhah — anger; vigateccha-bhaya-krodho — banishing desire, fear and
anger; yah — who; sada - forever, always; muktah - free, liberated; eva - verily,
truly; sah — he.

Having all external contacts excluded and fixing his gaze between the
eyebrows, equalising the inward and outward breaths as they pass up and
down the nostrils; controlling the senses, mind and intellect, solely pursuing
moksa (liberation), the sage, who has forever banished desire, fear and
anger, is truly liberated. (5.27-28)

bhoktaram yajna-tapasam sarva-loka-mahesvaram
suhrdam sarva-bhutanam jnatva mam santim rcchati (5.29)

bhoktaram — the beneficiary, the enjoyer; yajna — of sacrifices; tapasam - of
penances and austerities; sarva-loka — of all worlds (planets, spheres) and the
demigods thereof; sarva-loka-mahesvaram - the great Ruler of all the worlds;
maha-isvaram — the Supreme Lord; su-hrdam — friend; sarva — of all;
bhutanam — the living entities; sarva-bhutanam — of all beings; jnatva — thus
knowing, having known; mam — Me; santim — peace; rcchati - reaches, attains.

On knowing Me, as the Lord of sacrifices and austerities, the great Ruler of
all the worlds, and the friend of all beings, he reaches peace. (5.29)

In the Upanisad of the Bhagavadglta, the knowledge of Brahman the
Supreme, the science of yoga, and the dialogue between Srlkrsna and
Arjuna, this is the fifth discourse entitled, "Sam

Sixth Discourse

Dhyana -Yoga

RENUNCIATION INACTION

sri-bhagavan uvaca
anasritah karma-phalam karyam karma karoti yah
sa sannyasi ca yogi ca na niragnir na cakriyah (6.01)

sri-bhagavan uvaca — the Supreme Lord said; anasritah - not depending on;
karma-phalam - fruit of action; karyam — bounden; karma - duty, work; karoti

— performs; yah — who; sah — he; sannyasi — ascetic; ca - and, also; yogi —
yogi; ca - and, also; na — not; nih — without; agnih — fire; na - not, nor; ca -
and, also; akriyah — without action.

The Supreme Lord said: He who performs such action as duty, without
depending on the fruits of action, he is a sannyasin (ascetic) and a yogi, not
he who ceases from sacrificial fire and rites. (6.01)

(Note: The sannyasin, the ascetic lights no sacrificial fire, and performs no
sacrifices or ceremonies; but just omitting these, without true renunciation is not
being a true ascetic.)

yam sannyasam iti prahur yogam tam viddhi pandava
na hy asannyasta-sankalpo yogi bhavati kascana (6.02)

yam - what, which; sannyasam — renunciation; iti — thus; prahuh — they say,
call, term; yogam — yoga; tam — that; viddhi — know; pandava — O son of
Pandu, Arjuna; na - not, never; hi - verily, truly, certainly; asannyasta —
without giving up; sankalpah — desire for self-satisfaction; asannyasta-sankalpo
- one who has not renounced; yogi — yogi; bhavati — becomes; kascana —
anyone.

Know that what is termed renunciation is the practice of Yoga, O Pandava
(Arjuna), for without renouncing set purpose (sankalpa), no one can become
a yogi. (See also 5.01, 5.05, 6.01, and 18.02) (6.02)

ACTION IS A STEPPING-STONE TO DHYANA-YOGA

aruruksor muner yogam karma karanam ucyate
yogarudhasya tasyaiva samah karanam ucyate (6.03)

aruruksoh - wishing to climb, who desires to attain yoga; muneh — of the sage,
or Muni; yogam — yoga; karma — action; karanam — the means; ucyate — is said
to be; yoga — yoga; arudhasya — of one who has attained; tasya - his, of him;
eva — even; samah - serenity, quiescence; karanam — the means; ucyate — is
said.

For the sage who desires to attain yoga, action is said to be the means. For
the same sage, when he has attained yoga, it is said that serenity (samah) is
the means. (6.03)

WHO IS THE YOGI?

yada hi nendriyarthesu na karmasv anusajjate
sarva-sankalpa-sannyasi yogarudhas tadocyate (6.04)

yada — when; hi - verily, surely, certainly; na — not; indriya-arthesu - objects
of sense, in sense gratification; na - not, never; karmasu — in actions; anusajjate
- is attached; sarva-sankalpa — of all material desires; sonny asi — renouncer;
yoga-arudhah - one who has attained in yoga, elevated in yoga; tada — then;
ucyate — is said.

For the one who knows no attachment to objects of sense and actions, when
he has renounced all set purpose, then he is said to have attained yoga.
(6.04)

uddhared atmanatmanam natmanam avasadayet
atmaiva hy atmano bandhur atmaiva ripur atmanah (6.05)

uddharet — one must deliver, let (him) raise; atmana — by the Self; atmanam —
the self; na - not, never; atmanam — the self; avasadayet - let (him) lower; atma
- the Self; eva — only; hi - truly, verily, indeed; atmanah — of the self; bandhuh
- friend; atma - the Self; eva — only; ripuh — enemy; atmanah — of the self.

Let him raise the self by the Self, and let him not lower himself; for truly
only the Self is the friend of the self, and also the Self the self's enemy.

(6.05)

bandhur atmatmanas tasya yenatmaivatmana jitah
anatmanas tu satrutve vartetatmaiva satru-vat (6.06)

bandhuh — friend; atma - the Self; atmanah — of the self; tasya — of him; yena -
- by whom; atma — the Self; eva — even; atmana - by the Self; jitah - is
conquered; anatmanah -of the unrestrained (unconquered) self; tu — but;
satrutve - in the place of an enemy; varteta — remains; atma — the Self; eva -
even; satru-vat — as an enemy.

The Self is the friend of the self of him whose self is by the Self conquered;
but to the unrestrained self, the Self will definitely act as an enemy. (6.06)

jitatmanah prasantasya paramatma samahitah
sitosna-sukha-duhkhesu tatha manapamanayoh (6.07)

jita-atmanah - of the self-controlled; prasantasya — who has attained
tranquillity ;parama-atma — the Supreme Self; samahitah — approached
completely, balanced, steadfast; sita — in cold; usna — heat; sukha — happiness;
duhkhesu — and pain; sitosna-sukha-duhkhesu — in cold and heat, in pleasure
and pain; tatha - as well, as also; mana — in honour; apamanayoh — and
dishonour.

The Supreme Self (higher self) of the self-controlled, who knows
tranquillity, is steadfast in cold and heat, in pleasure and pain, as well as in
honour and dishonour. (6.07)

jnana-vijnana-trptatma kuta-stho vijitendriyah
yukta ity ucyate yogi sama-lostrasma-kancanah (6.08)

jnana — by acquired knowledge; vijnana — and realized knowledge; trpta —
satisfied; atma - an embodied soul; jnana-vijnana-trptatma - one who is
satisfied with knowledge realising it (self-realisation); kuta-sthah -rock-seated,
unshaken; vijita-indriyah -who has subdued the senses; yuktah - being
integrated, united, harmonised; iti — thus; ucyate — is said; yogi — yogi; soma —
equipoised; lostra — pebbles; asma — stone; kancanah - gold; sama-lostrasma-
kancanah — one to whom a lump of earth, a stone and gold are equal.

The Yogi whose "self is satisfied in knowledge learnt, who remains rock-
seated, with senses subdued, he is said to be an integrated, and for whom a
lump of earth, a stone and gold are equal. (6.08)

suhrn-mitrary-udasina- madhyastha-dvesya-bandhusu
sadhusv api ca papesu sama-buddhir visisyate (6.09)

su-hrt - benefactors, good-hearted, well-wishers by nature; mitra - friends; ari -
- enemies; udasina — neutrals; madhyastha — arbiters; dvesya — the haters;
bandhusu — and the relatives; suhrn-mitrary-udasina-madhyastha-dvesya-
bandhusu — towards benefactors, friends, companions, enemies, the indifferent,
the neutrals, the hateful, relatives; sadhusu — into the good; api — as well as; ca
— and; papesu — into the evil; sama-buddhih — having equal mind, or
intelligence; visisyate - excelling, excels.

Excellent he whose attitude is the same towards benefactors, friends,
companions, enemies, the indifferent, the neutrals, the hateful, relatives, the
good and the evil ones. (6.09)

DIRECTION FOR THE PRACTICE OF MEDITATION

yogi yunjita satatam atmanam rahasi sthitah
ekaki yata-cittatma nirasir aparigrahah (6.10)

yogi - the yogi; yunjita - let him keep the mind steady; satatam — constantly;
atmanam - self or mind (in this context); rahasi — in a solitary place; sthitah -
remaining, being situated; ekaki — alone; yata-citta-atma - one with mind and
body under control; nirasih — without free from hope (desires); aparigrahah —
free from possessiveness.

Let the Yogi constantly concentrate his mind on yoga, remaining alone in a
solitary place, with mind and body under full control, free from desires and
attachment to material possessions. (6.10)

sucau dese pratisthapya sthiram asanam atmanah
naty-ucchritam nati-nicam cailajina-kusottaram (6.11)

sucau — in a clean; dese — place; pratisthapya - having set himself up, having
established; sthiram — firm; asanam — seat; atmanah — his own; na — not; ati —
too; ucchritam — high; na - not, nor; ati — too; nicam — low; caila-ajina — cloth
and deerskin; kusa - and (sacred) kusa grass; uttaram - covering.

Let him for himself set up a firm seat in a clean place, neither too high nor
yet too low, on the sacred kusa grass, covered with a deer-skin and over it a
cloth. (6.11)

tatraikagram manah krtva yata-cittendriya-kriyah
upavisyasane yunjyad yogam atma-visuddhaye (6.12)

tatra — there; eka-agram - one-pointed; manah — mind; krtva — making; yata-
citta — restraining the mind; indriya — senses; kriyah - the motions, the actions;
upavisya - sitting, fixed (on the seat); asane — on the seat; yunjyat — should
practice; yogam — yoga; atma — the self; visuddhaye - for the purification.

There let him sit, and making the mind one-pointed, with the motions of
thought and senses restrained, fixed on his seat practise yoga for the
purification of the Self. (6.12)

samam kaya-siro-grivam dharayann acalam sthirah
sampreksya nasikagram svam disas canavalokayan (6.13)

samam - erect, straight; kaya — body; sirah — head; grivam — and neck; samam
kaya-siro-grivam - body, head and neck; dharayan — holding; acalam - stil,
unmoving; sthirah - steady, one's own, still; sampreksya - fixing, gazing,
looking; nasika — of the nose; agram — at the tip; svam — own; disah - around,
directions, on all sides; ca - and, also; anavalokayan — not looking.

Remaining still, holding the body, head and neck erect, let him fix his gaze
on the tip of his nose, without looking around. (6.13)

prasantatma vigata-bhir brahmacari-vrate sthitah
manah samyamya mac-citto yukta asitamat-parah (6.14)

prasanta - serene (minded); atma — mind; vigata-bhih — fearless; brahmacari-
vrate — in the vow of Brahmacharya (celibacy); sthitah — firm; manah — mind;
samyamya — completely subduing, having controlled; mat — on Me; cittah —
concentrating the mind, thinking; maccittah — thinking on Me; yuktah -
balanced, with intent; asita — should sit; mat — Me;parah — the supreme goal.

Serene minded, fearless, firm in the vow of celibacy (of the Brahmachari),
the mind controlled, thinking on Me in total concentration, let him sit with
intent on Me as the supreme goal. (See also 4.29, 5.27, 8.10 and 8.12) (6.14)

yunjann evam sadatmanam yogi niyata-manasah
santim nirvana-paramam mat-samstham adhigacchati (6.15)

yunjan — balancing; evam - so, thus; sada - ever, always; atmanam - the Self;
yogi — yogi; niyata-manasah - one with controlled mind; santim - to the peace;
nirvana-paramam - that which culminates in Nirvana (Moksha); mat-samstham
- abiding in Me, subsisting in Me; adhigacchati — attains.

So, the Yogi ever integrated in the Self, his mind restrained, attains to the
peace which has Nirvana (nirvana...) as its end, and which subsists in Me.
(...paramdm). (6.15)

naty-asnatas tu yogo 'sti na caikantam anasnatah
na cati-svapna-silasya jagrato naiva carjuna (6.16)

na - not, never; ati — too much; asnatah — of one who eats; tu - however, but;
yogah — yoga; asti — is; na - not, nor; ca - and, also; ekantam - at all;
anasnatah - of one who does not eat, abstaining from eating; na - not, nor; ca -
and, also; ati — too much; svapna-silasya — of one who sleeps; jagratah — or
one who stays awake too long; na — not; eva — even; ca — and; arjuna — O
Arjuna.

However, O Arjuna, yoga is not for him, who eats too much, nor for him
who does not eat at all; nor for him who sleeps too much, nor yet for him
who stays awake too long. (6.16)

yuktahara-viharasya yukta-cestasya karmasu
yukta-svapnavabodhasya yogo bhavati duhkha-ha (6.17)

yukta — regulated; ahara — eating; viharasya — recreation; yukta — regulated;
cestasya - the one who works for maintenance; karmasu — in discharging
duties; yukta-cestasya karmasu - is moderate in exertion in actions; yukta —
regulated; svapna-avabodhasya — sleep and wakefulness; yogah — practice of
yoga; bhavati — becomes; duhkha-ha - the destroyer of pain.

But, yoga is for him who is regulated (yukta) in food and recreation, who is
regulated in all his deeds and gestures, who is regulated in sleeping as in
walking, achieving a yoga which destroys all pain. (6.17)

yada viniyatam cittam atmany evavatisthate
nisprhah sarva-kamebhyo yukta ity ucyate tada (6.18)

yada — when; viniyatam - well-controlled; cittam — the mind; atmani — in the
Self; eva — only; avatisthate — becomes situated, established; nisprhah - free
from longing; sarva — for all kinds of, after all ; kamebhyah -after all desirable
things; yuktah — yogi; iti — thus; ucyate — is said ; tada — then.

When the well-controlled mind is established in the Self alone, free from
longing after all desirable things, then it is said, that the one is at peace.
(6.18)

yatha dipo nivata-stho nengate sopama smrta
yogino yata-cittasya yunjato yogam atmanah (6.19)

yatha — as; dipah — lamp; nivata-sthah — in a windless place; na - not, does
not; ingate — flicker; sa — this; upama - simile, be likened, comparison; smrta -
is thought of, is considered; yoginah — of the yogi; yata-cittasya — whose mind
is controlled; yunjatah — constantly engaged, of the practising, of the one being
absorbed; yogam - the yoga; atmanah - of the Self.

As a lamp may stand not flickering in a windless place - this has been
likened with the disciplined mind of a Yogi, absorbed in the yoga of the Self.
(6.19)

yatroparamate cittam niruddham yoga-sevaya
yatra caivatmanatmanam pasyann atmani tusyati (6.20)

yatra - where (when); uparamate — is at rest, attains quietness; cittam — mind;
niruddham - restrained, quieted; yoga-sevaya — by the practise of yoga; yatra -
where (when); ca - and, also; eva — only; atmana — by the self; atmanam — the
Self; pasyan — seeing; atmani — in the Self; tusyati — one becomes satisfied, is
satisfied, finds fulfilment.

When the mind is at rest, quieted by the practise of yoga; when seeing the
Self by the self, he finds fulfilment in his own Self. (6.20)

sukham atyantikam yat tad buddhi-grahyam atindriyam
vetti yatra na caivayam sthitas calati tattvatah (6.21)

sukham - joy, bliss, happiness; atyantikam - infinite; yat — which; tat — that;
buddhi — by intelligence, reason; grahyam - grasping, accessible; atindriyam -
transcending the senses; vetti — knows; yatra - where, wherein, when; na - not,
never; ca - and, also; eva — even; ayam — he; sthitah - established, situated,
standing still; calati — moves; tattvatah - from reality, from the truth.

When he knows that utmost joy which, transcending the senses, can be
grasped by the intellect; when standing still (in the Self), he never departs
from reality. (See also KaU 3.12) (6.21)

yam labdhva caparam labham manyate nadhikam tatah
yasmin sthito na duhkhena gurunapi vicalyate (6.22)

yam — which; labdhva — by attainment, having reached, obtained; ca - and,
also; aparam — other; labham — gain; manyate - thinks, considers; na - not,
never; adhikam - greater, more; tatah — than that; yasmin — in which; sthitah -
established, being situated; na - not, never; duhkhena - by sorrow, by miseries;
guruna api — even though very difficult, even in the greatest; vicalyate - is
dislodged, is moved, becomes shaken.

When, having reached it, he thinks that there is no greater acquisition
beyond it; therein established, he is not dislodged by any sorrow, even in
the greatest suffering: (6.22)

tarn vidyad duhkha-samyoga- viyogam yoga-samjnitam
sa niscayena yoktavyo yogo 'nirvinna-cetasa (6.23)

tarn — that; vidyat - let (him) know, is known; duhkha-samyoga viyogam — the
unlinking from the union with pain; a state of severance from the union with
pain; duhkha-samyoga — of the miseries of material contact; viyogam —
extermination; yoga-samjnitam — called yoga; sah — that; niscayena — with
determination; yoktavyah — must be practised; yogah — yoga; anirvinna-cetasa
- with undesponding mind, with an undistracted mind, with an undismayed
mind, a mind without deviation.

That state is known by the name of yoga (viyogan), the unlinking from the
union with pain. This is the yoga which must be brought about with firm
resolve and an undismayed mind. (6.23)

MORE DIRECTIONS ON THE PRACTISE OF YOGA

sankalpa-prabhavan kamams tyaktva sarvan asesatah
manasaivendriya-gramam viniyamya samantatah (6.24)

sankalpa-prabhavan — born of sankalpa (imagination); sankalpa — mental
speculations; prabhavan — born of; kaman — desires; tyaktva - having
abandoned, giving up; sarvan — all; asesatah - without reserve, without
remainder, completely; manasa — by the mind; eva — even; indriya-gramam —
the full set of senses, the senses; viniyamya - controlling ; samantatah — from
all sides.

Abandoning without remainder all desires which arise from thought,
controlling the senses from every side by the mind; (6.24)

sanaih sanair uparamed buddhya dhrti-grhita ya
atma-samstham manah krtva na kincid api cintayet (6.25)

sanaih — gradually; sanaih - little by little; uparamet - let him attain, let he
come, one should hold back; buddhya - by the intellect, by intelligence; dhrti-
grhitaya - held in firmness, carried by conviction; atma-samstham — placed in
the Self, abide in the Self; manah — mind; krtva - having made; na — not; kincit
- anything, nothing else; api — even; cintayet — should think of, thinking of.

His intellect held fast in steadfastness, let he come little by little to rest,
having made the mind abide in the Self, thinking of nothing else. (6.25)

yato yato niscalati manas cancalam asthiram
tatas tato niyamyaitad atmany eva vasam nayet (6.26)

yatah yatah - by whatever matter; niscalati - wanders away, becomes verily
agitated; manah — the mind; cancalam - flickering, restless; asthiram —
unsteady; tatah tatah — from there, from that; niyamya - should hold back,
having restrained, regulating; etat — this; atmani — in the Self; eva — alone;
vasam - to subject, under control; nayet — must bring under.

By whatever matter the flickering and unsteady mind wanders away, he
should hold it back, and subject it to the Self alone. (6.26)

THE RESULT OF DHYANA-YOGA

prasanta-manasam hy enam yoginam sukham uttamam
upaiti santa-rajasam brahma-bhutam akalmasam (6.27)

prasanta-manasam - one of peaceful mind; prasanta — peaceful, fixed on ;
manasam — whose mind; hi - verily, certainly; enam — this; yoginam — yogi;
sukham - bliss, happiness; uttamam - supreme, the highest; upaiti - comes,
attains; santa-rajasam - whose passion is laid to rest, his passion pacified;
brahma-bhutam - Brahman become, liberation by identification with Brahman;
akalmasam - who is sinless, one who is free from sin, freed from all sinful
reactions.

Supreme bliss is for the Yogi whose mind is stilled, whose passion is laid to
rest, who is sinless, and of the nature of Brahman. (6.27)

yunjann evam sadatmanam yogi vigata-kalmasah
sukhena brahma-samsparsam atyantam sukham asnute (6.28)

yunjan — engaging in yoga practise, practising yoga; evam — thus; sada —
always; atmanam — the self; yogi — yogi; vigata — freed from; kalmasah - freed
from all sin, all material stain; sukhena -with ease; brahma-samsparsam -
caused by contact with Brahman; atyantam - infinite, the highest; sukham —
bliss; asnute — attains.

The Yogi, in this way, always integrating the Self, freed from all sins,
attains with ease the infinite bliss of Brahman's touch. (6.28)

sarva-bhuta-stham atmanam sarva-bhutani catmani
iksate yoga-yuktatma sarvatra sama-darshanah (6.29)

sarva-bhuta-stham - abiding in all beings, situated in all beings; atmanam — the
self; sarva — all; bhutani - beings, entities; ca - and, also; atmani — in the Self;
iksate — sees; yoga-yukta-atma - one who is integrated in yoga, one who is
harmonised by yoga; sarvatra — everywhere; sama-darshanah — seeing the
same everywhere.

He, whose self is integrated in yoga, sees the Self abiding in all beings, and
all beings in the Self, seeing the same everywhere. (See also 4.35, 5.18) (6.29)

yo mam pasyati sarvatra sarvam ca mayi pasyati
tasyaham na pranasyami sa ca me na pranasyati (6.30)

yah — whoever; mam — Me; pasyati — sees; sarvatra — everywhere; sarvam -
everything, all; ca — and; mayi — in Me; pasyati — sees; tasya — for him; aham -
- 1; na — not; pranasyami — am lost; sah — he; ca - and, also; me — to Me; na -
not, nor; pranasyati — is lost.

He, who sees Me everywhere, and sees everything in Me, for him I am not
lost, nor is he lost for Me. (6.30)

sarva-bhuta-sthitam yo mam bhajaty ekatvam asthitah
sarvatha vartamano 'pi sa yogi mayi vartate (6.31)

sarva-bhuta-sthitam - abiding in all beings; yah - he who; mam — Me; bhajati —
worships; ekatvam - in unity, in oneness; asthitah - as abiding, established,
situated; sarvatha — in all respects, in every way; vartamanah — remaining; api
- also; sah - he, his; yogi — yogi; mayi — in Me; vartate - stands, remains.

He, who embraces unity, worships Me as abiding in all beings, that Yogi
lives in Me, whatever his mode of life. (6.31)

atmaupamyena sarvatra samam pasyati yo 'rjuna
sukham va yadi va duhkham sa yogi paramo matah (6.32)

atma — with his self (himself); aupamyena - in comparison; atmaupamyena - in
comparison with himself; sarvatra — everywhere; samam - equally, equality,
seeing the same; pasyati — sees; yah — who; arjuna — O Arjuna; sukham -
pleasure, happiness; va — and; yadi — if; va — or; duhkham — pain; so/* — he;
yogi — yogi; paramah — perfect; matah — is considered.

O Arjuna, he who, in comparison with himself, sees the same everywhere in
pleasure as in pain, he is considered to be the perfect Yogi. (6.32)

PRACTICE AND DETACHMENT ARE THE SUREST MEANS TO YOGA

arjuna uvaca
yo 'yam yogas tvaya proktah samyena madhusudana
etasyaham na pasyami cancalatvat sthitim sthiram (6.33)

arjunah uvaca — Arjuna said; yah - which; ayam — this; yogah — yoga; tvaya —
by You; proktah - preached, taught, described; samyena - of equanimity;
madhusudana — O destroyer of the demon Madhu; etasya - it, its; aham — I; na
— do not; pasyami — see; cancalatvat - owing to the wavering, due to being
restless; sthitim — situation; sthiram - firm, steady, stable.

Arjuna said: O destroyer of Madhu (Madhusudana/Krsna), the yoga of
equanimity that you have preached, I see not a firm foundation for it, owing
to the wavering of the mind. (6.33)

cancalam hi manah Krsna pramathi balavad drdham
tasyaham nigraham manye vayor iva su-duskaram (6.34)

cancalam - unsteady, restless, flickering; hi - verily, certainly; manah — mind;
krsna — O Krsna; pramathi - turbulent, agitating; bala-vat — strong; drdham -
difficult to curb, unyielding, obstinate; tasya - it, its; aham — I; nigraham -
control, (hard) to hold, subduing; manye — think; vayoh — of the wind; iva - as,
like; su-duskaram - difficult, hard.

For the mind, O Krsna, is truly unsteady, turbulent, strong and difficult to
curb, I think it as hard to hold as the wind. (6.34)

sri-bhagavan uvaca
asamsayam maha-baho mano durnigraham calam
abhyasena tu Kaunteya vairagyena ca grhyate (6.35)

sri-bhagavan uvaca — the Supreme Lord said; asamsayam — undoubtedly;
maha-baho — O mighty-armed, Arjuna; manah — the mind; durnigraham —
difficult to curb; calam - flickering, restless; abhyasena — by practice; tu — but;
kaunteya — O son of Kunti, Kaunteya, Arjuna; vairagyena — by detachment,
dispassion; ca - and, also; grhyate — can be so controlled, can be curbed.

The Supreme Lord said: herein, there is no doubt, O mighty -armed
(Arjuna), the mind is hard to curb and fickle; but it may be curbed by
untiring practice and detachment. (6.35)

asamyatatmana yogo dusprapa iti me matih
vasyatmana tu yatata sakyo 'vaptum upayatah (6.36)

asamyata - unrestrained, unsubdued, uncontrolled; atmana — by the mind;
asamyatatmana - by a man of uncontrolled self; yogah — yoga; dusprapah -
hard to achieve, attain; iti — thus; me — My; matih — opinion; vasya —
controlled; atmana — by the mind; vasyatmana - by the self-controlled one; tu —
but; yatata — while endeavouring, by the striving one; sakyah — possible;
avaptum — to achieve, can be won; upayatah — by appropriate means.

I hold that yoga is hard to achieve for someone whose self is unsubdued; but
he who strives, self-controlled, it can be won by the appropriate means.
(6.36)

FAILURES IN THE PRACTICE OF YOGA AND ITS CONSEQUENCES

arjuna uvaca
ayatih sraddhayopeto yogac calita-manasah
aprapya yoga-samsiddhim kam gatim krsna gacchati (6.37)

arjunah uvaca — Arjuna said; ayatih - the uncontrolled; sraddhaya — by faith;
upetah - possessed, engaged; yogat — from yoga; calita — deviated; manasah —
who has such a mind; calita-manasah - one whose mind wanders away (his
mind wandering); aprapya — failing to attain; yoga-samsiddhim -perfection in
yoga; kam — which; gatim - end, destination; krsna — O Krsna; gacchati -
meets, achieves (what is its end),

Arjuna said: He who is lacking self-control, even though his faith, his mind
wandering away from Yoga, failing to attain perfection in yoga, what is his
end, O Krsna? (6.37)

kaccin nobhaya-vibhrastas chinnabhram iva nasyati
apratistho maha-baho vimudho brahmanah pathi (6.38)

kaccit — whether; na — not; ubhaya — both; vibhrastah — fallen from; chinna -
split, rent, torn; abhram — cloud; iva — like; nasyati — perishes; apratisthah -
supportless (his firm foundation gone), without any position; maha-baho — O
mighty-armed, Krsna; vimudhah - confused, deluded, bewildered; brahmanah —
of Brahman; pathi — on the path.

Both objects unachieved, does he not perish like a split cloud, his firm
foundation gone, O mighty-armed (Krsna), confused on Brahman's path?
(6.38)

etan me samsayam Krsna chettum arhasy asesatah
tvad-anyah samsayasyasya chetta na hy upapadyate (6.39)

etat — this; me — my; samsayam — doubt; krsna — O Krsna; chettum — to dispel;
arhasi - consent, You are requested; asesatah — completely; tvat — than You;
anyah — other; samsayasya - of doubt; asya — this; chetta - dispeller, remover;
na - not, never; hi - verily, certainly; upapadyate — is to be found, is fit.

Consent, O Krsna, to dispel completely this doubt of mine; for none is to be
found except Yourself able to destroy this doubt. (6.39)

sri-bhagavan uvaca
partha naiveha namutra vinasas tasya vidyate
na hi kalyana-krt kascid durgatim tata gacchati (6.40)

sri-bhagavan uvaca — the Supreme Lord said; partha — O son of Prtha, Arjuna;
na eva — never is it so; iha - here (in this material world); na - not, never;
amutra — in the next life, the life to come, the next world; vinasah —
destruction; tasya - for him, his; vidyate - is, exists; na - not, never; hi - verily,
certainly; kaiyana-krt — one who is engaged in favourable activities, one who
does good; kascit — anyone; durgatim - bad state or grief, to degradation; tata —
My friend; gacchati — goes.

The Supreme Lord said: O Partha (Arjuna), neither in this world nor in the
life to come is there destruction for him; for, no doer of righteousness, O
beloved, treads the path of grief. (6.40)

prapya punya-krtam lokan usitva sasvatih samah
sucinam srimatam gehe yoga-bhrasto 'bhijayate (6.41)

prapya - having reached, having attained, having achieved; punya-krtam — of
the righteous; lokan - worlds, spheres, planets; usitva - having dwelt, having
lived, after dwelling; sasvatih - many, endless; samah — years; sucinam — of the
pious; sri-matam — of the prosperous; gehe — in the house; yoga-bhrastah — one
who has fallen from yoga; abhijayate — takes his birth, is born.

Having reached the worlds of the righteous and lived there endless years, he
who fell from yoga is reborn in the house of the pious and prosperous.
(6.41)

atha va yoginam eva kule bhavati dhimatam
etad dhi durlabhataram- loke janma yad idrsam (6.42)

atha va — or; yoginam — of yogis; eva — even; kule — in the family; bhavati - is
born, takes birth; dhi-matam - of the wise; etat — this; hi — verily; durlabha-
taram - is harder, very rare; loke — in this world; janma — birth; yat — that;
idrsam — like this.

Or, else he may be born in a family of wise yogis only; but the kind of birth
is harder to obtain in this world. (6.42)

tatra tarn buddhi-samyogam labhate paurva-dehikam
yatate ca tato bhuyah samsiddhau kuru-nandana (6.43)

tatra - there, thereupon; tarn — that; buddhi-samyogam - revival or regaining
knowledge, union; labhate — gains; paurva-dehikam - from his former body,
from the previous body; yatate — he strives; ca - and, also; tatah - than that,
than before; bhuyah — more; samsiddhau — for perfection; kuru-nandana — O
son of the Kurus, Arjuna.

There he regains the knowledge belonging to his former body, and strives
more than before for perfection, O son of the Kurus (Arjuna). (6.43)

purvabhyasena tenaiva hriyate hy avaso 'pi sah
jijnasur api yogasya sabda-brahmativartate (6.44)

purva - former, previous; abhyasena — by practice; tena — by that; eva - verily,
certainly; hriyate - is motivated, is attracted; hi — indeed; avasah - helpless,
grow faint; api - even, also; sah — he; jijnasuh - he who inquires after the
practice of yoga; api — even; yogasya - of yoga; sabda-brahma - Brahmic
word; ativartate - rising beyond.

By that former practice he is irresistibly motivated in spite of himself. Even
he who inquires after the practice of yoga rises beyond the Brahmic word
(the Vedas). (6.44)

THE BEST OF YOGIS

prayatnad yatamanas tu yogi samsuddha-kilbisah
aneka-janma-samsiddhas tato yati param gatim (6.45)

prayatnat - with utmost zeal, with assiduity, by rigid practice; yatamanah -
striving, endeavoring; tu - but, and; yogi - the yogi; samsuddha - cleansed,
purified, washed off; kilbisah — all of whose sins; aneka — after many; janma —
births; samsiddhah — having achieved perfection; aneka-janma-samsiddhah -
perfected through many births; tatah —then; yati - reaches, attains; param -
supreme, the highest; gatim -goal, path, destination.

But the yogi, striving with utmost zeal, cleansed from sin, fully perfected
through many births, then reaches the Supreme goal. (6.45)

tapasvibhyo 'dhiko yogi jnanibhyo 'pi mato 'dhikah
karmibhyas cadhiko yogi tasmad yogi bhavarjuna (6.46)

tapasvibhyah — than the ascetics; adhikah - superior, greater; yogi — the yogi;
jnanibhyah — than the wise; api - even, also; matah — considered; adhikah -
superior, greater; karmibhyah — than the men of action; ca - and, also; adhikah
- superior, greater; yogi - a yogi; tasmat — therefore; yogi — a yogi; bhava —
just become; arjuna — O Arjuna.

The yogi is thought superior to the ascetics; he is even considered superior
to men of knowledge; he is also superior to men of action, therefore become
a yogi, O Arjuna. (6.46)

yoginam api sarvesam mad-gatenantar-atmana
sraddhavan bhajate yo mam sa me yuktatamo matah (6.47)

yoginam — of yogis; api - even, also; sarvesam - of all; mat-gatena - abiding,
absorbed in Me, always thinking of Me; antah-atmana - with (his) inner Self;
sraddha-van — in full faith; bhajate — worships; yah — who; mam — to Me (the
Supreme Lord); sah — he; me — by Me; yukta-tamah - the yogi fully integrated,
the greatest yogi; matah - is thought, is considered.

And, among all yogis, he who full of faith worships Me with his inner Self
absorbed in Me, he is thought by Me as the most fully integrated. (6.47)

In the Upanisad of the Bhagavadglta, the knowledge of Brahman the

Supreme, the science of yoga, and the dialogue between Srlkrsna and

Arjuna, this is the sixth discourse entitled, "Dhyana -Yoga".






Seventh Discourse

Vynana -Yoga

REALISING THE SUPREME LORD THROUGH MEDITATION

sri-bhagavan uvaca

mayy asakta-manah Partha yogam yunjan mad-asrayah

asamsayam samagram mam- yatha jnasyasi tac chrnu (7.01)

sri-bhagavan uvaca — the Supreme Lord said; mayi — to Me; asakta-manah —
mind attached; partha — O son of Prtha, Arjuna; yogam — yoga; yunjan —
practising; mat-asrayah - taking refuge in Me; asamsayam — without doubt;
samagram - fully, wholly, completely; mam — Me; yatha — how; jnasyasi —
you shall know; tat — that; srnu — hear.

The Supreme Lord said: With the mind attached to Me, O Partha, engaged
in yogic practices, taking refuge in Me, hear now how you shall know Me
fully and without doubt. (7.01)

jnanam te 'ham sa-vijnanam idam vaksyamy asesatah
yaj jnatva neha bhuyo 'nyaj jnatavyam avasisyate (7.02)

jnanam — knowledge; te — to you; aham — I; sa — with; vijnanam - with
realisation, with experience; idam — this; vaksyami — shall teach; asesatah -
completely, in full; yat — which; jnatva — knowing; na — not; iha — here;
bhuyah — more; anyat - nothing else; jnatavyam - (nothing left) to be known;
avasisyate — remains

I shall completely teach you this knowledge combined with experience,
leaving nothing unsaid. This knowing, there remains nothing left to be
known. (See also MuU 1.01.03) (7.02)

manusyanam sahasresu kascid yatati siddhaye

yatatam api siddhanam kascin mam vetti tattvatah (7.03)

manusyanam — of men; sahasresu — among thousands; kascit — someone; yatati
— strive; siddhaye — for perfection; yatatam — of those so endeavouring, among
those (who strive); api — even; siddhanam — of those having won perfection;
kascit — someone; mam — Me; vetti — know; tattvatah — in essence.






Among thousands of men, one maybe will strive for perfection; and even
among those who strive having won perfection, only one, maybe, know Me
as I really am. (7.03)

EVOLUTION OF THE UNIVERSE THROUGH DIVINE PRAKRITI

bhumir apo 'nalo vayuh kham mano buddhir eva ca
ahankara itiyam me bhinna prakrtir astadha (7.04)

bhumih — earth; apah — water; analah — fire; vayuh — air; kham — ether; manah

— mind; buddhih — intellect; eva — even; ca — and; ahankarah - egoism (sense
of self); iti — thus; iyam — this; me — My; bhinna - separated, divided, divisions;
prakrtih — nature; astadha — eightfold.

Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intellect (Buddhi) and ego (Ahamkara,
sense of self), these are the eightfold divisions of My nature (Prakriti). (See
also 13.05) (7.04)

apareyam itas tv anyam prakrtim viddhi me param
jiva-bhutam maha-baho yayedam dharyate jagat (7.05)

apara - lower, inferior; iyam — this; itah - from this, besides this; tu — but;
anyam - other, another; prakrtim — nature; viddhi — just try to understand, but
know; me — My; param - higher, superior, jiva-bhutam - the very life-element;
maha-baho — O mighty-armed, Arjuna; yaya — by which; idam — this; dharyate

— is kept maintained, is upheld; jagat — the material world, the universe.

This is the lower (Prakriti)( Apard-sakti), but know My other nature the
higher (Prakriti) (Para-sakti), the life-element, O mighty-armed (Arjuna), by
which this universe (jagat) is kept maintained. (7.05)

etad-yonini bhutani sarvanity upadharaya

aham krtsnas ya jagatah prabhavah pralayas tatha (7.06)

etat — these two natures (Prakritis); yonini — whose source of birth, take their
birth; bhuta-ni — beings; sarvani — all; iti — thus; upadharaya — know; aham —
I; krtsnasya - of the whole; jagatah — of the world; prabhavah — the source, the
origin; pralayah - annihilation, dissolution, its end; tatha — also.

Know that from these (two Natures) all beings take their birth. Therefore, I
am the origin of the whole universe and also its end. (See also 13.26) (7.06)






mattah parataram nanyat kincid asti dhananjaya
mayi sarvam idam protam sutre mani-gana iva (7.07)

mattah - than I, than Me; para-taram - higher, superior; na — not; any at -
other; kincit — anyone; asti — is; dhananjaya - O Dhananjaya, O conqueror of
wealth, Arjuna; mayi — in Me; sarvam — all; idam — this; protam — is strung;
sutre — upon a thread; mani-ganah - (clustered) pearls; iva — like.

There is nothing whatsoever higher than I, O Dhananjaya (Arjuna), in Me
the universe (sarvan) is strung, like clustered pearls upon a thread. (7.07)

THE DIVINE PRINCIPLE INTEGRATED IN THE UNIVERSE

raso 'ham apsu Kaunteya prabhasmi sasi-suryayoh
pranavah sarva-vedesu sabdah khe paurusam nrsu (7.08)

rasah - flavour, sapidity, taste; aham — I; apsu — in water; kaunteya - O
Kaunteya, O son of Kunti, Arjuna; prabha - radiance, light; asmi — I am; sasi-
suryayoh — of the moon and the sun; pranavah — the three syllables a-u-m, OM;
sarva — in all; vedesu — the Vedas; sabdah — sound (vibration); khe — in the
ether; paurusam - ability, manhood; nrsu — in men.

I am the flavour in water, O son of Kunti (Arjuna), I am the radiance in
moon and sun; in all the Vedas the OM syllable, sound in ether, and
manhood in all men. (7.08)

punyo gandhah prthivyam ca tejas casmi vibhavasau
jivanam sarva-bhutesu tapas casmi tapasvisu (7.09)

punyah - pure, sweet, original; gandhah — fragrance; prthivyam — in the earth;
ca - and, also; tejah - heat, brilliance, flame; ca - and, also; asmi - (I) am;
vibhavasau — in fire; jivanam — life; sarva — in all; bhutesu - in all beings;
tapah - austerity, penance; ca - and, also; asmi - (I) am; tapasvisu — in ascetics.

I am the pure fragrance in the earth, the flame's onset in fire; I am the life
in all beings, and I am the fierce austerity in ascetics. (7.09)

bijam mam sarva-bhutanam viddhi partha sanatanam
buddhir buddhimatam asmi tejas tejasvinam aham (7.10)

bijam — seed; mam — Me; sarva-bhutanam — of all beings; viddhi — know;
partha — O son of Prtha, Arjuna; sanatanam — eternal; buddhih — intelligence;






buddhi-matam — of the intelligent; asmi - (I) am; tejah — glory; tejasvinam — of
the glorious; aham — I (am).

O Partha (Arjuna), know Me as the eternal seed of all beings. I am the
intelligence of the intelligent, and the glory of the glorious. (7.10)

balam balavatam caham kama-raga-vivarjitam
dharmaviruddho bhutesu kamo 'smi bharatarsabha (7.11)

balam — strength; bala-vatam — of the strong; ca — and; aham - (I) am; kama —
passion; raga — and attachment; vivarjitam — devoid of; kama-raga-vivarjitam -
knowing no passion nor attachment; dharma-aviruddhah - unopposed to
dharma (duty); bhutesu — in contingent beings; kamah — desire; asmi - (I) am;
bharata-rsabha — O lord of the Bharatas, Arjuna.

And I am the power of the powerful, knowing no passion nor attachment;
and in contingent beings I am the desire unopposed to duty (Dharma), O
lord of the Bharatas (Arjuna). (7.11)

ye caiva sattvika bhava rajasas tamasas ca ye
matta eveti tan viddhi na tv aham tesu te mayi (7.12)

ye - whatever, all which; ca — and; eva — even; sattvikah — in goodness; bhavah
— states of being; rajasah — in the mode of passion; tamasah — in the mode of
ignorance; ca - and, also; ye - whatever, all which; mattah — from Me; eva —
verily; iti — thus; tan - them, those; viddhi — know; na — not; tu — but; aham —
I; tesu — in them; te — they; mayi — in Me.

Know too that all the objects of goodness (Sattva), passion (Rajas), or
ignorance (Tamas) proceed from Me, but I am not in them, they are in Me.
(See also 9.04 and 9.05) (7.12)

MAYA AND HOW TO OVERCOME IT

tribhir guna-mayair bhavair ebhih sarvam idam jagat
mohitam nabhijanati mam ebhyah param avyayam (7.13)

tribhih - (these) three; guna-mayaih - composed of gunas; bhavaih - by
naturesby the states of being; ebhih — by these; sarvam - entire, all; idam — this;
jagat — world; mohitam — deluded; na abhijanati — does not know; mam — Me;
ebhyah - from them; param - higher, also "the Supreme"; avyayam -
immutable, inexhaustible.






By these three states of being composed of gunas, this entire world is led
astray, and do not know that I am far beyond them and immutable. (7.13)

daivi hy esa guna-mayi mama maya duratyaya

mam eva ye prapadyante may am etam taranti te (7.14)

daivi — divine; hi — verily; esa — this; guna-mayi - caused (made) by the gunas,
consisting of the three modes of material nature; mama — My; maya - illusion
(illusive energy); duratyaya - is hard to transcend, very difficult to overcome;
mam — in Me; eva — only; ye — who; prapadyante - taking refuge (put his trust
in Me alone), surrender; mayam etam — this illusory energy, this uncanny Maya;
taranti - pass beyond, overcome; te — they.

For all this My divine Maya (power), caused by the gunas (the three modes),
is hard to transcend. Therefore, whoever shall put his trust in Me alone,
pass beyond this uncanny Maya. (See also 14.26, 15.19; and 18.66) (7.14)

na mam duskrtino mudhah prapadyante naradhamah
mayayapahrta-jnana asuram bhavam asritah (7.15)

na — not; mam — unto Me; duskrtinah - the evil-doers, miscreants; mudhah -
the deluded, foolish; prapadyante - seek, look for, surrender; nara-adhamah -
the base, the lowest of men, lowest among mankind; mayaya - by Maya, by the
illusory energy; apahrta — deprived; jnanah - (of) knowledge; asuram -
demonic, belonging to demons (embracing a devilish form of life); bhavam —
nature; asritah - embracing, having taken to, accepting.

The doers of evil, the deluded, the base, put not their trust in Me; their
mind seduced by this uncanny Maya (power), they have embraced a devilish
form of life (bhava). (7.15)

FOUR CLASSES OF VIRTUOUS PEOPLE (DEVOTEES)

catur-vidha bhajante mam janah sukrtino 'rjuna
arto jijnasur artharthi jnani ca bharatarsabha (7.16)

catuh-vidhah — four kinds of; bhajante — worship; mam — unto Me; janah -
people, persons; su-krtinah - virtuous, those who are pious; arjuna — O Arjuna;
artah - the afflicted, the distressed; jijnasuh — the seeker of knowledge; artha-
arthi - the seeker of wealth, one who desires material gain; jnani -the wise; ca -
and, also; bharata-rsabha — O great one amongst the descendants of Bharata, O
lord of the Bharatas, Arjuna.






Fourfold are the virtuous people who worship Me, O Arjuna, the afflicted,
the ones who look for knowledge, the ones who strive for gain (self-
interested), and the men of knowledge (the learned, the wise), O best of the
Bharatas (Arjuna). (See also TR 1.21.03) (7.16)

tesam jnani nitya-yukta eka-bhaktir visisyate

priyo hi jnanino 'tyartham aham sa ca mama priyah (7.17)

tesam — of them, of these; jnani - the wise, the men of knowledge; nitya-yuktah

- ever integrated, ever steadfast, always engaged; eka — only; bhaktih — in
devotion to the One, worshipping the One; visisyate - is best, excels, is special;
priyah — very dear; hi — verily; jnaninah — to the person in knowledge, of the
wise; atyartham - exceedingly, highly; aham — I ; sah — he; ca - and, also;
mama — to Me; priyah — dear.

Of these, is the man of knowledge, ever integrated, worshipping the One, is
the best: to such a man I am exceedingly dear, and he is dear to Me. (7.17)

udarah sarva evaite jnani tv atmaiva me matam
asthitah sa hi yuktatma mam evanuttamam gatim (7.18)

udarah - noble, magnanimous; sarve — all; eva — surely; ete — these; jnani —
one who is in knowledge, the wise; tu — but; atma (Self) eva- just like Myself;
me — My; matam — opinion; asthitah - is integrated, is established, situated; sah

— he; hi — verily; yukta-atma - steadfast-minded, fixed on Me (the highest
goal); mam — in Me; eva — verily; anuttamam — the highest; gatim - goal,
destination.

Noble and exalted are all these, but the man of knowledge, do I regard as
My very Self; for his self integrated, is fixed on Me, the highest goal. (See
also 9.29) (7.18)

bahunam janmanam ante jnanavan mam prapadyate
vasudevah sarvam iti sa mahatma su-durlabhah (7.19)

bahunam - of many; janmanam - of many (repeated) births, repeated births (and
deaths); ante - in the end, at the close, after; jnana-van -the man of knowledge,
the wise; mam — unto Me; prapadyate - takes refuge, approaches, surrenders;
vasudevah - Vasudeva, Krsna; sarvam - all, everything; iti — thus; sah — that;
maha-atma - the noble soul, the great soul; su-durlabhah — very rare to see,
very hard to find.






At the close of many births, the man of knowledge takes refuge in Me,
concluding that Vasudeva's son (Krsna) is all. Such a noble soul (Mahatma)
is very rare. (7.19)

THE IGNORANT WORSHIP INFERIOR GODS

kamais tais tair hrta-jnanah prapadyante 'nya-devatah
tarn tam niyamam asthaya prakrtya niyatah svaya (7.20)

kamaih — by desires; taih taih — various; hrta — deprived of; jnanah —
knowledge; hrta-jnanah - those whose knowledge have been swept away, those
whose wisdom has been rent away; prapadyante - approach, resort, surrender;
anya — to other; devatah - other gods, deities; tam tam - this or that, various;
niyamam - rules and precepts, rites, regulations; asthaya - following, being
engaged; prakrtya — by nature; niyatah — controlled; svaya — by their own.

Those whose knowledge has been swept away by various desires, resort to
other deities (Devas), engaged with various rules and precepts, constrained
by their own nature. (7.20)

yo yo yam yam tanum bhaktah sraddhayarcitum icchati
tasya tasyacalam sraddham tam eva vidadhamy aham (7.21)

yah yah - whoever, who; yam yam - whatever, whichever; tanum — form of
deity; bhaktah — devotee; sraddhaya — with faith; arcitum — to worship; icchati
— desires; tasya tasya — of him; acalam - steady, unflinching; sraddham —
faith; tam — that; eva — surely; vidadhami — make; aham — I.

Whatever form (whatever deity) a devotee with faith desires to worship, that
very faith I confirm in him, making it steadfast. (7.21)

sa taya sraddhaya yuktas tasyaradhanam ihate
labhate ca tatah Kaman mayaiva vihitan hi tan (7.22)

sah — he; taya — with that; sraddhaya - with faith; yuktah - endued, endowed,
established; tasya — of that; aradhanam — worship; ihate - engages; labhate —
obtains; ca — and; tatah — from that; kaman — desires; maya — by Me; eva —
surely; vihitan - ordained, true dispenser; hi — verily; tan — those.

Firmly established (yukta) in that faith, he engages in the worship of that
form; from which he obtains his desires, though I am the true dispenser.

(7.22)






antavat tu phalam tesam tad bhavaty alpa-medhasam
devan deva-yajo yanti mad-bhakta yanti mam api (7.23)

anta-vat — finite; tu — but; phalam - fruit, reward; tesam - their, of them; tat —
that; bhavati - is, becomes; alpa-medhasam - those of little intelligence, of
those of small intelligence; devan — to the gods; deva-yajah — the worshipers of
the deities (Devas); yanti — go; mat — My; bhaktah — devotees; yanti - go to,
come to; mam — to Me; api — also.

However, finite is the reward of such a man of little intelligence. To the
deities go the worshippers of the deities, but My devotees come to Me. (7.23)

avyaktam vyaktim apannam manyante mam abuddhayah
param bhavam ajananto mamavyayam anuttamam (7.24)

avyaktam - the Unmanifested; vyaktim - having manifestation; apannam - come
to; manyante — think; mam — Me; abuddhayah - the foolish ones; param -
highest, supreme; bhavam — nature; ajanantah - not knowing; mama — My;
avyayam - immutable, imperishable; anuttamam — the finest, superior.

The foolish ones think I am the Unmanifested, as having manifestation,
knowing not My supreme nature, immutable and superior. (7.24)

naham prakasah sarvasya yoga-maya-samavrtah
mudho 'yam nabhijanati loko mam ajam avyayam (7.25)

na — nor; aham — I; prakasah — manifest; sarvasya - to all, to everyone; yoga-
maya- samavrtah - concealed by yoga; samavrtah - conceiled, veiled, covered;
mudhah - deceived, foolish, deluded; ayam - this, these; na — not; abhijanati -
knows, can understand; lokah — world; mam — Me; ajam — unborn; avyayam -
changeless, imperishable, inexhaustible.

I am not revealed to all, because concealed (as I am) by Yoga-Maya (the
creative power of yoga, all things being the thought-forms of the One). This
deceived world knows Me not, the Unborn and Changeless. (See also 5.16)
(7.25)

vedaham samatitani vartamanani carjuna
bhavisyani ca bhutani mam tu veda na kascana (7.26)

veda — know; aham — I; samatitani - the past; vartamanani — present; ca —
and; arjuna — O Arjuna; bhavisyani - the future (and yet to come); ca — and;






bhutani -all beings, all living entities; mam — Me; tu — verily; veda — knows;
na — not; kascana — anyone.

I know, O Arjuna, all beings past, present and yet to come, but no one
knows Me. (7.26)

THE ROOT OF ALL IGNORANCE

iccha-dvesa-samutthena dvandva-mohena bharata
sarva-bhutani sammoham sarge yanti parantapa (7.27)

iccha - desire, like; dvesa — and dislike; samutthena — arisen from; iccha-
dvesa-samutthena - arisen from like and dislike, arisen from attraction and
repulsion, arisen from desire and aversion; dvandva - the pairs of opposites, of
dualities; mohena — by the illusion; bharata — O scion of Bharata; sarva — all;
bhutani - all contingent beings, living entities; sammoham — into delusion,
illusion; sarge - at birth; yanti — go; parantapa - O Parantapa, O conqueror of
enemies.

Due to the delusion of the pairs of opposites (or, the dualities, dvandva),
arising from like and dislike (attraction and repulsion), O Bharata (Arjuna),
all contingent beings are subject to illusion at birth, O Parantapa (O

harasser of foes, Arjuna). (7.27)

DIVINE WORSHIP LEADS TO SELF-REALISATION

yesam tv anta-gatam papam jananam punya-karmanam

te dvandva-moha-nirmukta bhajante mam drdha-vratah (7.28)

yesam - those, whose, of whom; tu — but; anta-gatam - is at an end, have come
to an end; papam — sin; jananam - of men, of the persons; puny a - pure, pious,
virtuous; karmanam - involved in deeds ; punya-karmanam - men of pure
deeds; te — they; dvandva — of dualities, the pairs of opposites; moha —
delusion; nirmuktah — free from; moha-nirmuktah - released from the delusive
pairs of opposites; bhajante —worship; mam — to Me; drdha-vratah - steadfast
in their vows, with determination in their vows.

But those men of pure deeds whose sins have come to an end, released from
the delusive pairs of opposites (the dualities), steadfast in their vows, they
worship Me. (7.28)

jara-marana-moksaya mam asritya yatanti ye

te brahma tad viduh krtsnam adhyatmam karma cakhilam (7.29)






jara — from old age; marana — and death; moksaya — for the purpose of
liberation; jara-marana-moksaya — striving for liberation from decay and
death; mam — Me; asritya — taking shelter of, having taken refuge in, putting
their trust in...; yatanti — strive; ye — who; te — they; brahma — Brahman; tat —
actually that; viduh — know; krtsnam - in full, the whole, everything;
adhyatmam - knowledge of the Self; karma - action, activity; ca — and; akhilam

— whole.

They who, putting their trust in Me, striving for liberation (Moksa) from
decay and death, they realise in full the Brahman, the Self and all action

(karma). (7.29)

sadhibhutadhidaivam mam sadhiyajnam ca ye viduh
prayana-kale 'pi ca mam te vidur yukta-cetasah (7.30)

sadhibhuta adhidaivam — with the Adhibhuta (physical region), in the
Adhidaiva (the spiritual or divine region) together; mam — Me; sa-adhiyajnam -

- of Adhiyajna (region of sacrifice) together; ca — also; ye — who; viduh —
know; prayana — of death; kale — at the time; api — even; ca — and; mam — Me;
te — they; viduh — know; yukta-cetasah — their minds engaged in Me, they
steadfastly realise (Me) .

Those who realise Me in Adhibhuta (physical region), in the Adhidaiva (the
spiritual or divine region), and in that of Adhiyajna (region of sacrifice),
steadfastly realise Me, even at the time of death. (7.30)

In the Upanisad of the Bhagavadglta, the knowledge of Brahman the

Supreme, the science of yoga, and the dialogue between Srlkrsna and

Arjuna, this is the seventh discourse entitled, "Vynana -Yoga".






Eighth Discourse

Abhyasa-Yoga

THE SEVEN THINGS TO BE REALISED THROUGH MEDITATION

arjuna uvaca

kim tad brahma kim adhyatmam kim karma purusottama

adhibhutam ca kim proktam adhidaivam kim ucyate (8.01)

arjunah uvaca — Arjuna said; kim — what; tat — that; brahma — Brahman; kim —
what; adhyatmam — Adhyatma; kim — what; karma - action, fruitive activities;
purusa-uttama — O Krsna, O best among men; adhibhutam — Adhibhuta; ca —
and; kim — what; proktam — is called, declared; adhidaivam — Adhidaiva; kim —
what; ucyate — is called.

Arjuna said: What is That (tad) Brahman? What is Adhyatma (spiritual
light, self-knowledge), and what is action (Karma), O Purushottama (O
Krsna). And, what is Adhibhuta (contingent beings, the physical region)?
Also, what is called Adhidaiva (the spiritual or divine region)? (8.01)

adhiyajnah katham ko 'tra dehe 'smin madhusudana
prayana-kale ca katham jneyo 'si niyatatmabhih (8.02)

adhiyajnah - Adhiyajna, the Lord of sacrifice; katham — how; kah — who; atra -

- here; dehe — in the body; asmin — this; madhusudana — O Madhusudana,
Krsna; prayana-kale — at the time of death; ca — and; katham — howjneyah asi

— You can be known; niyata-atmabhih — by the self-controlled.

What is the meaning of Adhiyajna (the Lord of sacrifice), and who is in this
body, O Madhusudana (Krsna)? Also, how at the time of death, are you to
be known by the self -controlled? (8.02)

sri-bhagavan uvaca

aksaram brahma paramam svabhavo 'dhyatmam ucyate

bhuta-bhavodbhava-karo visargah karma-samjnitah (8.03)

sri-bhagavan uvaca — the Supreme Lord said; aksaram - imperishable,
indestructible; brahma — Brahman; paramam — Supreme; svabhavah - essential
nature; adhyatmam — self-knowledge; ucyate — is called; bhuta-bhava-






udbhava-karah - that which causes the origin of beings, producing the material
bodies of the living entities; visargah - the creative force; karma — action;
samjnitah — is called.

The Supreme Lord said: The Imperishable (Akshara) is Brahman, the
Supreme Being (Cosmic Intelligence); His essential nature (svabhdva) is
called Adhyatma (Self-knowledge); the creative force (visarga) is known as
'action' (karma); (8.03)

adhibhutam ksaro bhavah purusas cadhidaivatam
adhiyajno 'ham evatra dehe deha-bhrtam vara (8.04)

adhibhutam — Adhibhuta; ksarah — perishable; bhavah — nature; purusah - the
soul; ca — and; adhidaivatam — Adhidaiva; adhiyajnah — Adhiyajna; aham — I;
eva — alone; atra — in this; dehe - in the body; deha-bhrtam — of the embodied;
vara — O best.

Knowledge of Adhibhuta (of contingent beings) is My perishable existence,
and Purusha (god-man, living entity, living soul) is the divine (spiritual)
region (Adhidaivata). The Adhiyajna (the Lord of sacrifice, Entity of sacrifice)
tells of Me here in this body, O best of the embodied (Arjuna). (8.04)

anta-kale ca mam eva smaran muktva kalevaram

yah prayati sa mad-bhavam yati nasty atra samsayah (8.05)

anta-kale — at the time of death; ca — and; mam — Me; eva — only; smaran —
remembering; muktva - leaving, quitting; kalevaram — body; yah — who;
prayati - goes forth; sah — he; mat-bhavam — My nature, My being; yati -
accedes, attains, achieves; na — not; asti — there is; atra — here; samsayah —
doubt.

The one, who, at the time of death, leaving the body goes forth thinking of
Me alone, accedes to My divinity (mad-bhdva), there is no doubt about this.
(See also PrU 3.10) (8.05)

CONSTANT MEDITATION ON THE SUPREME IS A MUST

yam yam vapi smaran bhavam tyajaty ante kalevaram
tarn tarn evaiti Kaunteya sada tad-bhava-bhavitah (8.06)

yam yam - which, whatever; va - or; api — even; smaran — remembering;
bhavam — nature; tyajati - leaves, gives up, passing; ante — in the end;
kalevaram — the body; tarn tarn - similar, to that; eva — only; eti — goes;






kaunteya — O son of Kunti, Arjuna; sada - constantly, ever, always; tat — that;
bhava — state of being, object, form; bhavitah - remembering; tad-bhava-
bhavitah - thinking of that object.

On whatever form (bhava) a man thinks about at the time of passing, that
alone does he accede, O son of Kunti (Arjuna), because he has ever been
engaged in the thought thereof. (8.06) (See also ChU 3.14.01) (8.06)

tasmat sarvesu kalesu mam anusmara yudhya ca

mayy arpita-mano-buddhir mam evaishyasy asamsayah (8.07)

tasmat — therefore; sarvesu — at all; kalesu — times; mam — Me; anusmara -
(go on) remembering; yudhya — fight; ca — and; mayi — unto Me; arpita —
surrendering; manah — mind; buddhih — intellect; mayi arpita-manah-buddhih -
with mind and intellect fixed on me; mam — to Me; eva — alone; esyasi — you
will attain; asamsayah — beyond a doubt, without doubt, doubtless.

Therefore, at all times only remember Me and fight. With mind and
intellect fixed on Me, you will without doubt come to Me. (8.07)

THE SUPREME BEING TO BE MEDITATED ON

abhyasa-yoga-yuktena cetasa nanya-gamina

paramam purusam divyam yati parthanucintayan (8.08)

abhyasa-yoga — by practice; yuktena — being engaged in meditation; abhyasa-
yoga-yuktena - with the mind made firm by the method of constant meditation;
cetasa - with the mind; na anya-gamina — without their being deviated, not
going over to anything else, moving towards any other thing; paramam — the
Supreme; purusam — Purusha; divyam — Resplendent; yati - reaches, goes;
partha — O son of Partha, Arjuna; anucintayan — meditating.

Let one's thoughts be integrated in the yoga of constant practice, not going
over to anything else; so, by constantly meditating, O Partha (Arjuna) , one
reaches the Supreme, Resplendent Purusha (the All-Highest). (8.08)

kavim puranam anusasitaram anor aniyamsam anusmared yah

sarvasya dhataram acintya-rupam aditya- varnam tamasah parastat (8.09)

kavim — Omniscient; puranam - ancient, the oldest; anusasitaram — the Ruler;
anoh — than the atom; aniyamsam — smaller; anusmaret — always thinks of,
remembers; yah — who; sarvasya - of all, of everything; dhataram - the
dispenser, the supporter, the maintainer; acintya — inconceivable; rupam —






whose form; aditya-varnam - radiant like the sun; tamasah - from the
darkness; parastat — beyond.

One who meditates on the Omniscient, the Ancient Seer, the Ruler of all
things, smaller than the atom, the Dispenser of all, whose form is
inconceivable, who is as radiant as the sun beyond the darkness; (8.09)

prayana-kale manasacalena bhaktya yuktoyoga-balena caiva
bhruvor madhye pranam avesya samyak sa tarn param purusam upaiti
divyam (8.10)

prayana-kale — at the time of death; manasa — with mind; acalena - unshaken,
without its being deviated; bhaktya - with devotion; yuktah — steady; yoga-
balena — by the power of yoga; ca — also; eva — only; bhruvoh — the two
eyebrows, between the eyebrows; madhye — between; pranam - vital breath, the
life air; avesya - having placed, establishing; samyak — completely; sah — he;
tarn — that; param — supreme; purusam — Purusha; upaiti - reaches, achieves;
divyam - resplendent.

And who, at the time of death, with a steady (yukta) mind sustained by
devotion, and the power of yoga properly fixing the vital breath (prdna)
right between the eyebrows, he reaches the Supreme, Resplendent Purusha.

(8.10)

MEDITATION ON THE SUPREME IS THE SACRED SYLLABLE OM

yad aksaram veda-vido vadanti visanti yad yatayo vita-ragah

yad icchanto brahmacaryam caranti tat te padam sangrahena pravaksye

(8.11)

yat — which; aksaram - Imperishable (Brahman, Aksara Brahman) ; veda-vidah

— persons conversant with the Vedas, Veda scholars, Veda knowers ; vadanti -
declare, say; visanti — enter; yat — which; yatayah — great sages, the self-
controlled (ascetics or Sanyasins); vita-ragah - freed from attachment, in the
renounced order of life; yat — which; icchantah — desiring; brahmacaryam —
celibacy; caranti — practice; tat — that; te — to you; padam — goal; sangrahena

- in brief, in summary; pravaksye — I will declare.

The imperishable goal called aksara (Brahman, Aksara Brahman) of which
the Vedic scholars declare, into which the controlled and passion-free
Sanyasins (ascetics) enter, desiring that which the Brahmacharya (the vow
of continence) prescribes, that path will I declare to you in brief. (8.11)






sarva-dvarani samyamya mano hrdi nirudhya ca

murdhny adhayatmanah pranam asthito yoga-dharanam (8.12)

om ity ekaksaram brahma vyaharan mam anusmaran
yah prayati tyajan deham sa yati paramam gatim (8.13)

sarva-dvarani - all the gates, all the doors of the body; samyamya - having,
controlled, controlling; manah — the mind; hrdi — in the heart; nirudhya -
confining, having confined; ca — and; murdhni — in the head; adhaya - fixing,
having placed; atmanah — of the self; pranam — breath; asthitah - engaged in,
established in, situated in; yoga-dharanam — yogic practices, practice of
concentration; om — the combination of letters om (omkara); iti — thus; eka-
aksaram — the one syllabled; brahma - Brahman, Absolute; vyaharan -
pronouncing, uttering; mam — Me; anusmaran — remembering; yah — who;
prayati - goes, departs, leaves; tyajan — quitting; deham — the body; sah — he;
yati - attains, treads, achieves; paramam - the highest, supreme; gatim - path,
goal, refuge, destination.

All the gates of the body closed up, the mind confined within the heart,
fixing one's life-breath in the head, engaged in firm yogic practices,
pronouncing the "OM", the one-syllabled Brahman, thinking on Me, he
who goes forth, leaving the body, treads the highest path (goes to the high
goal or refuge). (8.12-13)

NO REBIRTH ON ATTAINING THE SUPREME BEING

ananya-cetah satatam yo mam smarati nityasah
tasyaham sulabhah Partha nitya-yuktasya yoginah (8.14)

ananya-cetah - thinking of nothing else at all, with the mind not thinking of any
other object, without deviation of the mind; satatam - unceasingly, constantly,
always; yah — who; mam — me; smarati — remembers; nityasah - regularly,
daily (for a long time); tasya — to him; aham — I; su-labhah - easily attainable,
very easy to achieve; partha — O son of Partha, Arjuna; nitya yuktasya - ever
integrated, ever engaged, ever steadfast; yoginah - of yogi.

Who bears Me in mind unceasingly, thinking of nothing else at all, to him I
am easily attainable, O Partha (Arjuna), of this ever integrated yogi. (8.14)

mam upetya punar janma duhkhalayam asasvatam
napnuvanti mahatmanah samsiddhim paramam gatah (8.15)






mam - to Me; upetya - having come, having attained, achieving; punah — again;
janma — birth; duhkha-alayam - that abode of pain, the place of pain, place of
miseries; asasvatam - that transitaory, non-eternal, temporary; na — not;
apnuvanti - reach, attain, get; maha-atmanah - Mahatmas, the great souls, the
noble souls; samsiddhim — perfection; paramam - highest, ultimate; gatah -
having reached, having achieved.

Having come to Me, these noble souls are no longer subject to rebirth, that
transitory abode of pain, not unending, for they have reached the highest
perfection (sansiddhi, the supreme prize). (8.15)

a-brahma-bhuvanal lokah punar avartino 'rjuna

mam upetya tu Kaunteya punar janma na vidyate (8.16)

a-brahma-bhuvanat - the world of Brahma, up to the world of Brahma, up to the
Brahmaloka sphere; lokah — the planetary system, worlds or spheres; punah —
again; avartinah — returning; punardvartinah — subject to return; arjuna — O
Arjuna; mam — to Me; upetya - having attained, coming, arriving; tu — but;
kaunteya — O son of Kunti, Arjuna; punah janma — rebirth; na — not; vidyate —
is.

The worlds (spheres), beginning with the world (sphere) of Brahman,
dissolve and evolve, but he who comes to Me, O son of Kunti (Arjuna), there
is no rebirth. (See also 9.25) (8.16)

THE DAY AND THE NIGHT OF BRAHMA

sahasra-yuga-paryantam ahar yad brahmano viduh
ratrim yuga-sahasrantam te 'ho-ratra-vido janah (8.17)

sahasra — one thousand; yuga — millenniums; paryantam — including; sahasra-
yuga-paryantam — ending in a thousand Yugas (ages); ahah — day; yat —
which; brahmanah — of Brahma; viduh — know; ratrim — night; yuga —
millenniums; sahasra-antam — similarly, ending after one thousand; yuga-
sahasrantam — ending in a thousand Yugas (ages); te — they; ahah-ratra — day
and night; vidah - the knowers, who understand; janah — people.

Those who know that a thousand yugas (ages) lasts one day of Brahma (the
Creator), and for a thousand yugas (ages) one such night. This knowing,
they know day and night. (8.17)

avyaktad vyaktayah sarvah prabhavanty ahar-agame
ratry-agame praliyante tatraivavyakta-samjnake (8.18)






avyaktat — from the unmanifested; vyaktayah - things manifested, living
entities; sarvah — all; prabhavanti - proceed, become manifest; ahah-agame —
at the coming of the day; ratri-agame — at the coming of the night; praliyante -
dissolve, merging again, are annihilated; tatra — into that, there; eva — verily;
avyakta — the unmanifest; samjnake — which is called; avyakta-samjnake - in
that which is called the unmanifested.

From the Unmanifested all things manifest proceed at the coming of the
day; and then at the coming of the night they merge again, even in "That"
called the Unmanifested. (8.18)

bhuta-gramah sa evayam bhutva bhutva praliyate
ratry-agame 'vasah Partha prabhavaty ahar-agame (8.19)

bhuta-gramah - the whole host of beings, multitude of beings, the aggregate of
all living entities; sah - that, these; eva — verily; ayam — this; bhutva bhutva -
coming into being repeatedly, being born again and again, repeatedly taking
birth; praliyate - is dissolved, is annihilated; ratri — of night; agame — on the
arrival; ratri-agame - at the coming of the night; avasah — helpless; partha — O
son of Partha, Arjuna; prabhavati - comes forth; ahah — of daytime; agame —
on the arrival; ahardgame - at the coming (down) of day.

This whole host of beings, coming into being repeatedly, is helplessly
dissolved at the coming of the night, O Partha (Arjuna), and at dawn of day,
it rises up again. (8.19)

THE SUPREME GOAL - HOW TO REACH

paras tasmat tu bhavo 'nyo 'vyakto 'vyaktat sanatanah
yah sa sarvesu bhutesu nasyatsu na vinasyati (8.20)

parah — higher; tasmat - than that; tu — but; bhavah — existence; anyah —
another; avyaktah — unmanifested; avyaktat - than the unmanifested; sanatanah
— eternal; yah - who; sah — that which; sarvesu - in all; bhutesu - in contingent
beings; nasyatsu - in being destroyed; na — not; vinasyati — is destroyed, the
perishing state.

However, beyond this unmanifested there is yet another which is
Unmanifested and Eternal, which does not perish when all contingent
beings perish. (8.20)






avyakto 'ksara ity uktas tarn ahuh paramam gatim

yam prapya na nivartante tad dhama paramam mama (8.21)

ayvaktah — unmanifested; aksarah - inderstructible, imperishable, infallible; iti

— thus; uktah — is said, is called; tam — that; ahuh - they say; paramam - the
supreme, the highest, the ultimate; gatim - goal, destination; yam — which;
prapya - reaching, gaining; na - not, never; nivartante - return, come back; tat -

- that; dhama — abode; paramam - supreme, highest; mama — My.

That Unmanifested, said to be "the Indestructible", "That" (tad), they say is
the supreme goal (refuge). They who reach it return not. That is My
supreme abode. (8.21)

purusah sa parah Partha bhaktya labhyas tv ananyaya
yasyantah-sthani bhutani yena sarvam idam tatam (8.22)

purusah — the Supreme Purusha; sah - He, That; parah — the Supreme, than
whom no one is greater, highest; partha — O son of Partha, Arjuna; bhaktya —
by devotion (in love and worship); labhyah - is attainable, can be achieved; tu -
verily; ananyaya — unalloyed, undeviating, and nothing else; yasya - (of)
whom; antah-sthani - dwelling within; bhutani — beings; yena — by whom;
sarvam — all; idam — this; tatam — pervaded.

That Supreme Purusha (highest Spirit), O Partha (Arjuna), within Whom all
creation dwell, and by Whom all this universe was spun (pervaded), is
attainable by love and worship (bhakti), and nothing else. (See also 9.04 and

PATHS OF LIGHT AND DARKNESS



yatra kale tv anavrttim avrttim caiva yoginah

prayata yanti tam kalam vaksyami bharatarsabha (8.23)

yatra — where; kale — time; tu — verily; anavrttim — no return, never to return;
avrttim — return; ca - and, also; eva — even; yoginah — yogis; prayatah -
departing, having departed; yanti - go to; tam — that; kalam — time; vaksyami —
I shall declare; bharata-rsabha — O best of the Bharatas, Arjuna.

Now, I shall declare, O best of the Bharatas (Arjuna), the time in which the
yogis set forth never to return, and also the time they set forth to return.

(8.23)






agnir jyotir ahah suklah san masa uttarayanam

tatra prayata gacchanti brahma brahma-vido janah (8.24)

agnih — fire; jyotih — light; ahah — day; suklah — the light (bright) fortnight;
sat-masah — the six months; uttara-ayanam - the sun's northern path, when the
sun passes on the northern side; tatra — there; prayatah - (the) departed those
who pass away; gacchanti — go; brahma - to Brahman, to the Absolute;
brahma-vidah - the knowers of Brahman, who know the Absolute; janah -
people, persons.

Fire, light, day, the moon's light fortnight, the six months of sun's northern
path, then departing, the knowers of Brahman, go the Brahman. (See also
ChU 4.1505, 5.10.01, BrU 6.2.15, PrU 1.10, and IsU 18) (8.24)

dhumo ratris tatha krsnah san-masa daksinayanam
tatra candramasam jyotir yogi prapya nivartate (8.25)

dhumah — smoke; ratrih — night; tatha — also; krsnah - the moons' dark
fortnight, the fortnight of the dark moon; sat-masah — the six months; daksina-
ayanam — the six months of sun's southern course, when the sun passes on the
southern side; tatra — there; candramasam — lunar; jyotih — the light; yogi — the
yogi; prapya - having attained, achieving; nivartate - comes again, returns,
comes back.

Smoke, night, the moon's dark fortnight, the six months of sun's southern
course, the yogi (dying) during these, reaches the light of the moon, and
back he comes again (reincarnates). (See also 9.21, ChU 5.10.03-05, BS

sukla-krsne gati hy ete jagatah sasvate mate
ekaya yaty anavrttim anyayavartate punah (8.26)

sukla - light, bright; krsne — and dark; gati - paths (two) of passing; hi — verily;
ete — these two; jagatah — of the world; sasvate — eternal; mate - are thought,
in the opinion; ekaya — by one; yati - (he) goes; anavrttim — to no return;
anyaya — by the other; avartate - (he) returns, comes back; punah — again.

These courses of light and dark are thought to be the eternal paths of the
world; by the one man goes to no return, and by the other one returns again

(rebirth, reincarnation). (8.26)

naite srti partha janan yogi muhyati kascana
tasmat sarvesu kalesu yoga-yukto bhavarjuna (8.27)






na - not, never; ete — these ; srti - tow paths, different paths; partha — O son of
Partha, Arjuna; janan — knowing; yogi — the yogi; muhyati - is deluded, is
bewildered; kascana — anyone; tasmat — therefore; sarvesu - in all; kalesu —
times; yoga-yuktah - in yoga integrated, steadfast in yoga; bhava- just become;
arjuna — O Arjuna

O Partha (Arjuna), knowing these paths the yogi is not deluded; therefore,
at all times be ever in yoga integrated, O Arjuna. (8.27)

THE GREATNESS OF YOGA

vedesu yajnesu tapahsu caiva danesu yat punya-phalam pradistam
atyeti tat sarvam idam viditva yogi param sthanam upaiti cadyam (8.28)

vedesu - in the study of the Vedas; yajnesu — in the performances of yajna,
sacrifice; tapahsu — in austerities; ca - and, also; eva — also; danesu - in
almsgiving, in gifts, in giving charities; yat — that which, whatever; punya-
phalam - fruit of merit; pradistam - indicated, is declared; atyeti - goes beyond,
surpasses; tat - that; sarvam — all; idam — this; viditva — knowing; yogi — the
yogi; param — supreme; sthanam — abode; upaiti - reaches, attains, achieves; ca
- and, also; adyam — primeval.

Knowing this, the yogi rises above the fruits of meritorious deeds attached
to the study of the Vedas, the sacrifices, austerities, and the almsgiving,
reaching the Supreme primeval State (sthdna). (8.28)

In the Upanisad of the Bhagavadglta, the knowledge of Brahman the

Supreme, the science of yoga, and the dialogue between Srlkrsna and

Arjuna, this is the eighth discourse entitled "Abhyasa-Yoga".






Ninth Discourse

Sovereign Knowledge and Big Secret

BRAHMA-JNANA IS THE BEST PHILOSOPHY

sri-bhagavan uvaca

idam tu te guhyatamam pravaksyamy anasuyave

jnanam vijnana-sahitam yaj jnatva moksyase 'subhat (9.01)

sri-bhagavan uvaca — the Supreme Lord said; idam — this; tu — indeed; te — to
you; guhya-tamam - the greatest mystery, the greatest secret, the most
confidential; pravaksyami - (I) shall declare, (I) am speaking; anasuyave - the
one who does not disapprove, the one who does not cavil, to the non-envious;
jnanam — knowledge; vijnana - experience, realised knowledge; sahitam —
with; vijnana-sahitam - combined with experience (realisation); yat — which;
jnatva — knowing; moksyase - you will be delivered, you will be released;
asubhat — from evil.

The Supreme Lord said: Since you are not disapproving, I shall now
declare to you this greatest mystery of knowledge (jndna) compatible with
experience (vyndna), and as by knowing it, you will be delivered from evil.
(09.01)

raja-vidya raja-guhyam pavitram idam uttamam
pratyaksavagamam dharmyam su-sukham kartum avyayam (9.02)

raja-vidya — the king of sciences; raja-guhyam - kingly secret; pavitram — the
sanctifier, the purifier; idam — this; uttamam — highest; pratyaksa — by direct
experience, immediately realisable; avagamam by intuition;

pratyaksavagamam - realisable by direct intuition; dharmyam - according to
righteousness; su-sukham — very easy; kartum - to carry out, to perform, to
execute; avyayam - everlasting, abiding forever, imperishable..

This is kingly science, kingly secret, the supreme sanctifier, immediately
realisable, unopposed to Dharma (conformed to righteousness), very easy to
carry out, and abiding forever. (09.02)

asraddadhanah Purusa dharmasyasya parantapa
aprapya mam nivartante mrtyu-samsara-vartmani (9.03)






asraddadhanah - those who have no faith, those who are faithless, the faithless;
purusah - men, such persons; dharmasya - of duty, in this dharma; asya - in
this; parantapa — O vanquisher of foes, Arjuna; aprapya - failing to reach,
without attaining, without obtaining; mam — Me; nivartante - return, come back;
mrtyu — of death; samsara — in material existence; vartmani — on the path;
mrtyu-samsara-vartmani - to the path of the mortal world, in the path of this
world of death.

O Parantapa (O vanquisher of foes, Arjuna), men who have no faith in this
Dharma (law of righteousness), fail to reach Me, but return to the path of
the mortal world. (9.03)

ALL BEINGS DWELL IN THE SUPREME

maya tatam idam sarvam jagad avyakta-murtina
mat-sthani sarva-bhutani na caham tesv avasthitah (9.04)

maya — by Me, in Me; tatam — pervaded; idam — this; sarvam — all; jagat -
universe, (world); avyakta-murtina - of the unmanifested form; mat-sthani -
subsist in Me; sarva-bhutani — all beings; na — not; ca - and, also; aham — I;
tesu — in them; avasthitah - placed, situated.

In My Unmanifested form, this entire universe is pervaded: in Me subsist
all beings, but I do not abide in them. (See also 7.12, 15.18) (9.04)

na ca mat-sthani bhutani pasya me yogam aisvaram
bhuta-bhrn na ca bhuta-stho mamatma bhuta-bhavanah (9.05)

na - not, never; ca - and, also; mat-sthani - dwell in, subsist in, situated in Me;
bhutani - contingent beings; pasya- behold, consider, just see; me — My; yogam
- yoga; aisvaram — divine; bhuta-bhrt — the sustaining the beings, supporting
the beings ; na - not, never; ca - and, also; bhuta-sthah - dwelling in the beings;
mama — My; atma — Self; bhuta-bhavanah - causing them to be, bringing forth
beings.

However, contingent beings do not subsist in Me; consider My sovereign
yoga (power)\ I sustain all beings, though not dwelling in them; My Self is
causing them to be. (See also BP 2.09.34-36) (9.05)

yathakasa-sthito nit yam vayuh sarvatra-go mahan
tatha sarvani bhutani mat-sthan ity upadhara ya (9.06)






yatha- as; akasa-sthitah — situated in space, resting in Akasa; nityam — always;
vayuh — the wind; sarvatra-gah - moving everywhere, blowing everywhere;
mahan — great; tatha — so; sarvani bhutani — all contingent beings; mat-sthani

- subsist, rests in Me; iti — thus; upadharaya — know.

As in space (akasa) subsists the mighty wind moving everywhere, so too do
all contingent beings subsist in Me. Know this. (9.06)

THE SUPREME IS THE BEGINNING AND THE END

sarva-bhutani Kaunteya prakrtim yanti mamikam
kalpa-ksaye punas tani kalpadau visrjamy aham (9.07)

sarva-bhutani — all contingent beings; kaunteya — O son of Kunti, O Kaunteya,
Arjuna; prakrtim - nature, to Prakriti; yanti — enter; mamikam — My; kalpa-
ksaye — at the end of the Kalpa (aeon); punah — again; tani — them; kalpa-adau

- at the beginning of a Kalpa; visrjami - emanate, send forth, create; aham — I.

O son of Kunti (O Kaunteya, Arjuna), all contingent beings enter My lower
Nature (prakrti) at the end of a Kalpa (aeon); and, again when another
Kalpa starts, I emanate them forth again. (9.07)

prakrtim svam avastabhya visrjami punah punah
bhuta-gramam imam krtsnam avasam prakrter vasat (9.08)

prakrtim — material nature, prakrti; svam - My own, of My personal Self;
avastabhya - having animated, entering into, firmly fixed; visrjami — I send
forth, I emanate; punah punah — again and again; bhuta-gramam - multitude of
beings; imam — this; krtsnam - all, in total; avasam — powerless; prakrteh — of
the force of nature, of Prakriti; vasat - under the control, by force, under
obligation.

Firmly fixed in My material Nature (prakrti), ever again I emanate all this
multitude of beings, powerless themselves, under the control of the material
Nature (prakrti). (9.08)

na ca mam tani karmani nibadhnanti dhananjaya
udasina-vad asinam asaktam tesu karmasu (9.09)

na - not, never; ca - and, also; mam — Me; tani - these, all those; karmani -
acts, works, activities; nibadhnanti — bind; dhananjaya - O Dhananjaya, O
conqueror of riches, Arjuna; udasina-vat - like one indifferent, as neutral;






asinam - sitting, situated; asaktam — unattached; tesu — to those; karmasu -
acts, actions.

O Dhananjaya (Arjuna), these acts of Mine bind Me not, nor limit Me:
remaining like one indifferent, unattached to those actions. (9.09)

ma yadh yaksena prakrtih su yate sa-caracaram
hetunanena kaunte ya jagad viparivartate (9.10)

maya — by Me; adhyaksena - as supervisor: prakrtih — material nature; suyate -

- produces; sa — both; cara-acaram the moving and the nonmoving; sa-
caracaram - both the moving and the unmoving; hetuna - by cause, for the
reason; anena - by this; kaunteya - O Kaunteya, O son of Kunti, Arjuna; jagat -

- the world; viparivartate - rotating, revolves, is working.

Because of My Nearness, the material Nature (prakrti) produces all this, the
moving and unmoving, because of that, O son of Kunti (Arjuna), the world
keeps rotating. (See also 14.03) (9.10)

THE LIFE OF THE WORLDLY-MINDED

avajananti mam mudha manusim tanum asritam
param bhavam ajananto mama bhuta-mahesvaram (9.11)

avajananti - disregard, deride; mam — Me; mudhah - fools, foolish men;
manusim — a human form; tanum — form; asritam — assuming; param —
supreme; bhavam - state or nature; ajanantah — not knowing; mama — My;
bhuta — of contingent beings; maha-isvaram — the great Lord; bhuta-
mahesvaram— the great Lord of contingent beings.

Fools scorn Me, for having assumed a human form, not knowing My
supreme Nature (bhdva), the great Lord of contingent beings. (9.11)

moghasa mogha-karmano mogha-jnana vicetasah
raksasim asurim caiva prakrtim mohinim sritah (9.12)

mogha-asah - of vain hopes; mogha-karmanah - of vain actions; mogha-jnanah

- of vain knowledge; vicetasah - senseless, devoid of discrimination; raksasim -
devilish, demonic; asurim - undivine, atheistic; ca — and; eva — verily; prakrtim

- nature; mohinim - leading astray, deceitful; sritah - (are) possessed of,
embracing a (monstruous).






Vain their hopes and vain their deeds, empty of knowledge, devoid of
discrimination, they embrace a monstrous devilish nature, leading them
astray. (See 16.04-18) (9.12)



THE WAYS OF THE DEDICATED DEVOTEES

mahatmanas tu mam Partha daivim prakrtim asritah
bhajanty ananya-manaso jnatva bhutadim avyayam (9.13)

maha-atmanah - mighty souls, great souls; tu — but; mam — unto Me; partha —
O son of Partha; daivim — divine; prakrtim — nature; asritah -taking up their
stand in My..., refuged (in),having taken shelter of; bhajanti — worship;
ananya-manasah - intent on naught but Me, with a mind devoted to nothing
else, without deviation of the mind; jnatva — knowing; bhuta — of creation, of
beings; adim - the source, the origin; avyayam - imperishable, inexhaustible.

But the Mahatmas (Mighty Souls), O Partha (Arjuna), taking up their stand
in My divine Nature (prakrti) (See 16.01-03), worship with minds intent on
naught but Me, as the imperishable source of all beings. (9.13)

satatam kirtayanto mam yatantas ca drdha-vratah
namasyantas ca mam bhaktya nit ya-yukta upasate (9.14)

satatam — always; kirtayantah - glorifying, chanting; mam — about Me;
yatantah - strenuous, striving, fully endeavouring; ca - and, also; drdha-vratah

- firm in vows, with determination; namasyantah - bowing down, prostrating;
ca — and; mam — Me; bhaktya — with devotion; nitya-yuktah - ever integrated,
perpetually engaged; upasate — worship.

Always do they glorify Me, strenuous, firm in vows, bowing down to Me,
devoted in their love (bhakti) ever integrated, they worship Me. (9.14)

jnana-yajnena capy an ye yajanto mam upasate
ekatvena prthaktvena bahudha visvato-mukham (9.15)

jnana-yajnena - with the sacrifice of knowledge, with the knowledge sacrifice,
by cultivation of knowledge; ca - and, also; api — also; anye — others; yajantah

— sacrificing; mam — Me; upasate — worship; ekatvena - as one, in oneness;
prthaktvena -as different; bahudha — as manifold, in various ways; visvatah-
mukham - face turned in various ways, the all-faced.






Others again sacrificing with the sacrifice of knowledge, worship Me as One
and yet as Manifold, with face turned in various ways and guise. (9.15)

ALL WORSHIP GOES TO THE SUPREME

aham kratur aham yajnah svadhaham aham ausadham
mantro 'ham aham evajyam aham agnir aham hutam (9.16)

aham — I; kratuh — sacrifice; aham — I; yajnah -the sacrifice; svadha -
oblation, the offering to Pitrus or ancestors; aham — I; aham — I; ausadham —
healing herb; mantrah - the sacred syllable; aham — I; aham — I; eva — also;
ajyam — melted butter (ghee or clarified butter); aham — I; agnih — fire; aham —
I; hutam - the offering.

I am the rite, I am the sacrifice, I am the food offered to ancestors, I am the
healing herb, I am the mantra, I am the sacred butter (clarified butter, Ghi),
I am the fire, and I the oblation (offered in the fire). (9.16)

pitaham asya jagato mata dhata pitamahah

vedyam pavitram omkara rk sama yajur eva ca (9.17)

pita — father; aham — I; asya — of this; jagatah - world, universe; mata —
mother; dhata - the supporter; pitamahah — grandfather; vedyam - the
knowable, what is to be known; pavitram - the purifier, that which purifies, the
vessel of purity; om-kara - the Omkara, the syllable om; rk — the Rg Veda;
sama — the Sama Veda; yajuh — the Yajur Veda; eva — also; ca — and.

I am the Father of this world, the Mother, the Supporter (Creator or
Sustainer), the Grandsire, I am the Knowable, I am the Sacred Syllable

"OM" (the vessel of purity, omkara), and also the Rg, Sama and Yajur (the
three Vedas). (9.17)

gatir bharta prabhuh sakai nivasah saranam suhrt
prabhavah pralayah sthanam nidhanam bijam avyayam (9.18)

gatih — goal; bharta - sustainer, supporter; prabhuh - the Lord; saksi - the
witness; nivasah - the abode; saranam - the shelter, the refuge; suhrt - the
friend; prabhavah - the origin; pralayah - the dissolution; sthanam - the
foundation; nidhanam - the treasure house; bijam - the seed; avyayam -
imperishable.






I am the Goal, the Sustainer, the Lord, the Witness, the Abode, the Shelter,
the Friend, the Origin, the Dissolution, the Foundation, the Treasure house,
and the Imperishable Seed. (See also 7.10 and 10.39) (9.18)

tapamy aham aham varsam nigrhnamy utsrjami ca
amrtam caiva mrtyus ca sad asac caham Arjuna (9.19)

tapami — give heat; aham — I; aham — I; varsam — rain; nigrhnami — withhold;
utsrjami — send forth; ca — and; amrtam — immortality; ca — and; eva — also;
mrtyuh — death; ca — and; sat — existence; asat - non-existence; ca — and;
aham — I; arjuna — O Arjuna.

I give heat, I hold back and release the rain, I am immortality as well as
death, the existence and the non-existence too, O Arjuna. (See also 13.12)
(9.19)

THE FRUITS OF INTERESTED ACTS OF VEDIC RITUAL



trai-vidya mam soma-pah puta-papa yajnair istva svar-gatim prarthayante
te punyam asadya surendra-lokam asnanti divyan divi deva-bhogan (9.20)

trai-vidyah — the knowers of the three Vedas; mam — Me; soma-pah — drinkers
of soma juice; puta — purified; papah — of sins; yajnaih - by sacrifices; istva —
worshiping; svah-gatim — way to heaven; prarthayante — pray ; te — they;
punyam — holy; asadya - ascending, having reached, attaining; sura-indra — of
Indra; lokam — the world; sura-indra lokam - the world of the lord of gods, the
world of the lord of the devas asnanti - (eat) enjoy; divyan - divine, celestial;
divi — in heaven; deva-bhogan — the celestial joys, the divine pleasures.

The knowers of the three Vedas, the Soma -drinkers, the purified from sin,
worshipping Me with sacrifice, seeking from Me the way of heaven; they,
ascending to the holy world of the Lord of the Devas, taste in heaven the
god's celestial joys. (9.20)

te tarn bhuktva svarga-lokam visalam ksine punye martya-lokam visanti
evam trayi-dharmam anuprapanna gatagatam kama-kama labhante (9.21)

te — they; tarn — that; bhuktva - having enjoyed, enjoying; svarga-lokam -
heaven-world; visalam — vast; ksine — being exhausted; punye — merit; martya-
lokam - the world of the mortals; visanti - come, enter; evam — thus; trayi — of
the three Vedas; dharmam — doctrines; anuprapannah - abiding by; gata-






agatam - the state of that which comes and goes, death and birth; kama-kamah -
desiring desires, desiring sense enjoyments; labhante — attain.

They, once having enjoyed the spacious expanse of heaven-world (svarga),
their merit (punya) exhausted, come back to the world of the mortals. And
so, it is that those adhering to the three Vedas only, desiring (objects of...)
desires, they attain that which comes and goes (the transitory). (See also

THE SUPREME IS WATCHING OVER HIS DEVOTEES WELFARE

anan yas cintayanto mam ye janah paryupasate

tesam nit yabhi yuktanam yoga-ksemam vahamy aham (9.22)

ananyah - without others, of no other, having no other object; cintayantah —
thinking; mam — on Me; ye — who; janah - men, persons; paryupasate —
worship; tesam — of them; nitya — always; abhiyuktanam — fixed in devotion;
nit yabhi yuktanam - of the ever-united, ever perseveringly; yoga — yoga;
ksemam — protection; yoga-ksemam - providing gain and security, the supply of
what is not already possessed, and the preservation of what is already possessed;
vahami — carry; aham — I.

To those who meditate on Me alone, thinking of no other, worshipping Me,
ever perseveringly, I provide gain and security. (9.22)

OTHER DEVOTEES DO ALSO BUT WORSHIP THE SUPREME IN

IGNORANCE

ye 'py anya-devata-bhakta yajante sraddhayanvitah

te 'pi mam eva Kaunteya yajanty avidhi-purvakam (9.23)

ye — those who; api — also; any a — of other; devata — gods; bhaktah —
devotees; yajante — worship; sraddhaya anvitah - full of faith, endowed with
faith; te — they; api — also; mam — Me; eva — alone; kaunteya — O son of Kunti,
Arjuna; yajanti — worship; avidhi-purvakam - contrary to, in a wrong way.

Even those who worship other deities full of faith, they also worship Me, O
son of Kunti (Arjuna), though contrary to ancient norms (or in ignorance).
(9.23)

aham hi sarva-yajnanam bhokta ca prabhur eva ca
na tu mam abhijananti tattvenatas cyavanti te (9.24)






aham — I; hi - verily, surely; sarva — of all; yajnanam — sacrifices; bhokta - the
beneficiary, the enjoyer; ca — and; prabhuh — lord; eva — alone; ca — and; na —
not; tu — but; mam — Me; abhijananti — know; tattvena - in essence, in reality;
atah — therefore; cyavanti - fail, fall; te -- they.

Because it is I who of all acts of sacrifice am the Beneficiary and Lord, but
they do not know Me in Essence, and so they fail. (9.24)

yanti deva-vrata devan pitrn yanti pitr-vratah
bhutani yanti bhuteiya yanti mad-yajino 'pi mam (9.25)

yanti — go; deva-vratah — worshipers of the Devas (deities); devan — to the
Devas (deities); pitrn — to the Pitrus or ancestors; yanti — go; pitr-vratah —
worshipers of Pitrus or ancestors; bhutani - to the Bhutas, to the disembodied
spirits, to the ghosts and spirits; yanti — go; bhuta-ijyah - the worshippers of the
Bhutas, worshipers of ghosts and spirits; yanti — go; mat — My; yajinah -
worshippers, devotees; madyajinah - my worshippers, my devotees; api — but;
mam — unto Me.

Those who worship the deities go to the deities, to the ancestors their
votaries, to the disembodied spirits the worshippers of these, but My
worshippers come to Me. (See also 8.16) (9.25)



SERVICE IN DEVOTION TO THE SUPREME



patram puspam phalam to yam yo me bhaktya prayacchati
tad aham bhakty-upahrtam asnami prayatatmanah (9.26)

patram — a leaf; puspam — a flower; phalam — fruit; toyam — water; yah —
whoever; me — to Me; bhaktya — with devotion; prayacchati - offers, gives; tat
— that; aham — I; bhakti-upahrtam — offered with devotion; asnami - (eat)
accept; prayata-atmanah — from the pure-minded, from the self-conquered.

Whoever with devotion (bhakti) gives Me a leaf, a flower, a fruit, water, that
do I accept, from the self-conquered, for it was devotion that made the
offering. (See also BP 10.81.04) (9.26)

yat karosi yad asnasi yaj juhosi dadasi yat

yat tapas yasi Kaunteya tat kurusva mad-arpanam (9.27)






yat — whatever; karosi — you do; yat — whatever; asnasi — you eat; yat —
whatever; juhosi — you offer up in sacrifice; dadasi — you give away; yat —
whatever; yat — whatever; tapas yasi — austerities you perform; kaunteya — O
son of Kunti, Arjuna; tat — that; kurusva — do; mat — to Me; arpanam — as an
offering.

Whatever you do, whatever you eat, whatever you offer up in sacrifice or
give away in alms, whatever austerity you may perform, O son of Kunti
(Arjuna), do it as an offering to Me. (See also 12.10, 18.46) (9.27)

subhasubha-phalair evam moks yase karma-bandhanaih
sannyasa-yoga-yuktatma vimukto mam upaisyasi (9.28)

subha — from auspicious; asubha — and inauspicious; phalaih — results; subha
asubha phalaih — from good and evil fruits; evam — thus; moksyase — you will
be free; karma — of work, action; bandhanaih — from the bondage; sannyasa —
of renunciation; yoga — yoga; yukta-atma - be yourself integrated; sannyasa-
yoga-yuktatma — with the mind steadfast in the yoga of renunciation, being
integrated by the yoga of renunciation; vimuktah — liberated; mam — to Me;
upaisyasi - you will come, you will draw nigh, you will attain.

In this way, you will be free from the bonds of action, whose fruits are good
and evil; by this attitude you will be yourself integrated by the yoga of
renunciation, and liberated you will draw nigh to Me. (9.28)

THE NEUTRALITY OF THE SUPREME

samo ham sarva-bhutesu na me dvesyo 'sti na priyah

ye bhajanti tu mam bhakt ya mayi te tesu capy aham (9.29)

samah - the same; aham — I; sarva-bhutesu — to all contingent beings; na - not,
no one, none; me — to Me; dvesyah — hateful; asti — is; na — not; priyah — dear;
ye — those who; bhajanti — worship; tu — but; mam — Me; bhaktya - with
devotion; mayi — in Me; te — they; tesu — in them; ca — and; api — also; aham —
I.

The same am I to all contingent beings, none do I hate and none do I fondly
love (priya). However, those who worship Me with devotion, abide in Me,
and I in them. (See also 7.18) (9.29)






ALL BEINGS ATTAIN SALVATION BY DEVOTION

api cet su-duracaro bhajate mam ananya-bhak

sadhur eva sa mantavyah samyag vyavasito hi sah (9.30)

api — even; cet — if; su-duracarah — one committing the most abominable
actions, a very wicked person, the most sinful; bhajate — worships; mam — unto
Me; ananya-bhak - with devotion to none else, with dedicated loving devotion,
without deviation; sadhuh — righteous; eva — verily; sah — he; mantavyah -
must (should) be regarded, is to be considered; samyak — rightly; vyavasitah —
resolved; hi — indeed; sah — he.

Even if the most sinful worships Me with dedicated loving devotion, he
must be regarded as a righteous, for his resolve is right. (9.30)



ksipram bhavati dharmatma sasvac-chantim nigacchati
kaunteya pratijanihi na me bhaktah pranasyati (9.31)

ksipram - quite soon; bhavati - (he) becomes; dharma-atma — righteous;
sasvat-santim — lasting peace, eternal rest, eternal peace; nigacchati — attains;
kaunteya — O son of Kunti, Arjuna; pratijanihi - know, declare; na - not, never;
me — My; bhaktah - Bhakta, devotee; pranasyati — perishes.

Quite soon will his self be imbued with Dharma (dharmatma, righteousness),
and obtain eternal rest. O son of Kunti (Arjuna), of this be certain: My
devotee perishes never. (9.31)

mam hi partha vyapasrit ya ye 'pi syuh papa-yonayah
striyo vaishyas tatha sudras te 'pi yanti param gatim (9.32)

mam — in Me; hi — indeed; partha — O son of Partha, Arjuna; vyapasritya -
finding refuge, taking refuge in, taking shelter in; ye — those (who); api — even;
syuh - may be; papa-yonayah - base-born, of mediocre birth, born of a lower
family; stri yah — women; vaishyah - Vaishyas, mercantile people, the merchant
caste; tatha — also; sudrah - Shudras, the manual labouring class, lower-class
men; te api — even (they); yanti — attain; param — the supreme; gatim - goal,
destination.

Because those who find refuge in Me, O Partha (Arjuna), base-born though
they may be, women, Vaishyas (the merchant caste), even Shudras (the
manual labouring class), even they attain the Supreme Goal. (See also 18.66)
(9.32)






kim punar brahmanah punya bhakta rajarsayas tatha
anityam asukham lokam imam prapya bhajasva mam (9.33)

kim — how much; punah — again; kim punah - how much more; brahmanah --
brahmanas; punyah — holy; bhaktah — devoted; raja-rsayah - royal saints,
seers; tatha — also; anityam — impermanent; asukham -joyless, unhappy; lokam

— world; imam — this; prapya - having obtained; bhajasva - do commune,
worship, be engaged in . . .; mam — to Me.

How much more, then, the Holy Brahmanas, and devoted royal seers!
Having come to this fleeting joyless world, do commune with Me in love

(bhaj). (9.33)

man-mana bhava mad-bhakto mad-yaji mam namaskuru
mam evaishyasi yuktvaivam atmamam mat-parayanah (9.34)

mat-manah - on Me fix your mind, with mind filled with Me, always thinking of
Me; bhava — become; mat — My; bhaktah — devotee; mat — My; yaji —
sacrificer; mam — to Me; namaskuru - prostrate, bow down; mam — to Me; eva -

- alone; esyasi — you will come; yuktva - being integrated, being absorbed,
having united; evam — thus; atmanam - the self; mat-parayanah - taking Me as
the Supreme Goal.

On Me fix your mind; be devoted to Me; sacrifice to Me; prostrate to Me.
Having made yourself integrated in Me, taking Me as the Supreme Goal,
you shall certainly come to Me. (9.34)

In the Upanisad of the Bhagavadglta, the knowledge of Brahman the

Supreme, the science of yoga, and the dialogue between Srlkrsna and

Arjuna, this is the ninth discourse entitled, "Sovereign Knowledge and Big

Secret".






Tenth Discourse

Divine Manifestations

THE SUPREME LORD IS THE SOURCE OF ALL MANIFESTATIONS

sri-bhagavan uvaca

bhuya eva maha-baho srnu me paramam vacah

yat te 'ham priyamanaya vaks yami hita-kamyaya (10.01)

sri-bhagavan uvaca — the Supreme Lord said; bhuyah — again; eva — verily;
maha-baho — O mighty-armed, Arjuna; srnu - listen, hear; me — My; paramam

— supreme; vacah — word; yat — which; te — to you; aham — I; priyamanaya -
who are beloved, beloved of Me; vaksyami - will declare; hita-kamyaya — for
your welfare.

The Supreme Lord said: O mighty-armed (Arjuna), once again listen to My
supreme word which I will declare to you, for therein is your satisfaction

(for you are beloved of Me), , and your welfare is My wish. (10.01)

na me viduh sura-ganah prabhavam na maharsayah
aham adir hi devanam maharsinam ca sarvasah (10.02)

na - not, never; me — My; viduh — know; sura-ganah — the hosts of Gods
(Devas); prabhavam — origin, opulences; na - not, never; maha-rsayah - the
Great Rishis; aham — I am; adih — the off-spring, the beginning; hi — for;
devanam — of the Gods, of the Devas; maha-rsinam — of the Great Rishis ; ca —
and; sarvasah - in every way, in all respects, (in the text replaced by "of the
Gods themselves ".

None knows My origin (prabhava: Great Lordly Power), nor the hosts of
Gods, nor the Great Rishis (a rishi is someone who has completed his human
evolution, but remaining in the super-physical regions in touch with planet
Earth. Also, a name used for great teachers): for I am the off -spring (source)
of the Gods themselves and the Great Rishis. (10.02)

yo mam ajam anadim ca vetti loka-mahesvaram
asammudhah sa martyesu sarva-papaih pramucyate (10.03)

yah — who; mam — Me; ajam — unborn; anadim — beginningless; ca — and; vetti

— knows; loka — of the worlds; maha-isvaram — the Supreme Lord;






asammudhah — undeluded; sah — he; martyesu — among mortals; sarva-papaih

— from all sin; pramucyate - is liberated, is delivered.

He who knows Me as Unborn, and Beginningless, Supreme Lord of the
worlds (the universe or cosmos), he, among mortals is not deceived, and
freed from all sins. (10.03)

buddhir jnanam asammohah ksama satyam damah samah
sukham duhkham bhavo 'bhavo bhayam cabhayam eva ca (10.04)

buddhih — intellect; jnanam — knowledge; asammohah — freedom from fallacy;
ksama — forgiveness; satyam — truth; damah - self-restraint; samah — calmness;
sukham - happiness, pleasure; duhkham — pain; bhavah — birth; abhavah —
death; bhayam — fear; ca — and; abhayam — fearlessness; eva — even; ca - and.

Intellect (buddhi), knowledge, freedom from fallacy, patience, truth,
restraint, calmness, pleasure, pain, birth (existence), death (non-existence),
fear and fearlessness as well. (10.04)

ahimsa samata tustis tapo danam yaso 'yasah

bhavanti bhava bhutanam matta eva prthag-vidhah (10.05)

ahimsa - non-violence; samata - equanimity, equilibrium; tustih - contentment,
satisfaction; tapah - austerity, penance; danam - almsgiving, beneficence,
charity; yasah — fame; ayasah — infamy; bhavanti - arise, come about; bhavah

- dispositions, natures; bhutanam - of contingent beings, of living entities;
mattah — from Me; eva — alone; prthak-vidhah - in all their diversity, of
different kinds, variously arranged.

None-violence, equanimity (samata), content, austerity, almsgiving, fame
and infamy, these are the dispositions (bhava) of contingent beings, and
from Me they arise in all their diversity. (10.05)

maharsayah sapta purve catvaro manavas tatha
mad-bhava manasajata yesam loka imah prajah (10.06)

maha-rsayah — the Great Rishis; sapta — seven; purve — ancient; catvarah —
four; manavah — Manus; tatha — also; mat-bhavah - originating in Me, born of
Me; manasah — from the mind; jatah — born; yesam — from them; loke — in the
world; imah — these; prajah - living beings, population.






The seven Great Rishis, as well as the ancient Four, and also the Manus
(progenitors of mankind) originating in Me were born of My mind; from
them arose all living beings in the world. (10.06)

KNOWLEDGE OF THE SUPREME LORD'S GLORY FOSTERS YOGA

etam vibhutim yogam ca mama yo vetti tattvatah
so vikalpena yogena yujyate natra samsayah (10.07)

etam - these, all this; vibhutimn - manifold manifestations; yogam — yoga
power, firm yoga, unfaltering yoga; ca — and; mama — of Mine; yah — who;
vetti — knows; tattvatah - in truth; sah — he; avikalpena — unshakable; yogena -
- in yoga; yujyate — is endowed; na — not; atra — here; samsayah — doubt.

He who knows in truth that sovereignty and yoga of Mine, is endowed with
firm yoga. Herein there is no doubt. (10.07)

aham sarvasya prabhava mattah sarvam pravartate

iti matva bhajante mam budha bhava-samanvitah (10.08)

aham — I; sarvasya — of all; prabhavah — the source, the origin; mattah — from
Me; sarvam — everything; pravartate - evolves, emanates; iti — thus; matva —
knowing; bhajante — worship; mam — Me; budhah — the wise; bhava-
samanvitah — perse veringly.

I am the origin of all; all things evolve from Me: this knowing, the wise
commune perseveringly with (bha-j) Me. (See also RV 8.58.02) (10.08)

mac-citta mad-gata-prana bodhayantah parasparam
kathayantas ca mam nityam tusyanti ca ramanti ca (10.09)

mat-cittah - with their minds fixed, their minds fully engaged in Me; mat-gata-
pranah - with their life absorbed in Me, with their life hidden in Me, their lives
devoted to Me; bodhayantah — enlightening; parasparam - one another,
mutually; kathayantah - talking of, speaking of, conversing; ca — and; mam —
Me; nityam - always, perpetually; tusyanti - are happy, are satisfied, become
pleased; ca — and; ramanti - are delighted, are joyful; ca — and.

With their minds fixed on Me, with their life hidden in Me, enlightening one
another, ever conversing about Me, they are happy and joyful. (10.09)

tesam satata-yuktanam bhajatam priti-purvakam
dadami buddhi-yogam tarn yena mam upayanti te (10.10)






tesam - for them; satata-yuktanam - ever integrated, ever steadfast; bhajatam -
commune, (of the) worshipping; priti-purvakam - in love; dadami — I give;
buddhi-yogam - yoga of discrimination; tarn — that; yena — by which; mam —
unto Me; upayanti — come; te — they.

And since they are ever integrated and commune with (bhaj-) Me in love
(priti), I give them the yoga of discrimination (buddhi-yoga, the discipline of
mind), by which they draw near to Me. (10.10)

tesam evanukampartham aham ajnana-jam tamah
nasayamy atma-bhava-stho jnana-dipena bhasvata (10.11)

tesam — for them; eva - mere, out of; anukampa-artham - out of loving
concern, out of compassion; aham — I; ajnanajam - born of ignorance; tamah —
darkness; nasayami - (I) dispel; atma-bhava — within their Self; sthah -
dwelling, situated; jnana — of knowledge; dipena — by the lamp; bhasvata -
shining, luminous, glowing.

Out of pure loving concern for them, within their Self, I dispel the darkness
born of ignorance by the shining lamp of knowledge. (10.11)

BLISS OB VIOUS IN THE SUPREME LORD 'S MANIFEST A TIONS

arjuna uvaca

param brahma param dhama pavitram paramam bhavan

purusam sasvatam divyam adi-devam ajam vibhum (10.12)

arjunah uvaca — Arjuna said; param — supreme; brahma — Brahman; param —
supreme; dhama — abode; pavitram - purifier, purity, pure; paramam —
supreme; bhavan — You; purusam — Purusha; sasvatam - eternal, permanent;
divyam — divine; adi-devam — the primeval God; ajam — unborn; vibhum -
omnipresent

Arjuna said: You are the Supreme Brahman, the Supreme Abode (home,
dhama), the Supreme Vessel of Purity, the Permanent, the Divine Being,
Primeval among the Gods, the Unborn, the Omnipresent. (10.12)

ahus tvam rsayah sarve devarsir naradas tatha
asito devalo vyasah svayam caiva bravisi me (10.13)

ahuh - this is highly praised (about you), (they) said, declare; tvam — of You;
rsayah - the Richis; sarve — all; deva-rsih - Deva Richi, the Rishis among the






Devas; naradah — Narada; tatha — also; asitah — Asita; devalah — Devala;
vyasah — Vyasa; svayam — yourself; ca — and; eva — even; bravisi — You tell,
say, explain; me — to me.

This is highly praised about You by all the Rishis, as also by the divine
Rishi Narada, and by Asita, Devela, Vyasa, and now You Yourself tell it to
me. (10.13)

sarvam etad rtam manye yan mam vadasi kesava

na hi te bhagavan vyaktim vidur deva na danavah (10.14)

sarvam — all; etat — this; rtam — true; manye - (I) hold, accept, think; yat —
which; mam — to me; vadasi — You tell, (what you) are saying; kesava - O
Kesava, O Krsna; na - not, never; hi — verily; te — Your; bhagavan — O Lord, O
blessed Lord; vyaktim - origin, manifestation; viduh - understand, (can) know;
devah - gods, Devas; na - not, nor; danavah — the demons.

All this I hold as true what you are saying to me, O Kesava (Krsna). Neither
the Gods (Devas) nor demons (Davanas, Asuras), O Lord, understand Your
origin. (See also 4.06) (10.14)

svayam evatmanatmanam vettha tvam purusottama
bhuta-bhavana bhutesa deva-deva jagat-pate (10.15)

svayam — yourself; eva — only; atmana — by Yourself; atmanam — Yourself;
vettha — know; tvam — You; purusa-uttama — O Supreme Purusha, O Supreme
Purushottama; bhuta-bhavana — O Source of contingent beings; bhuta-isa — O
Lord of contingent beings; deva-deva — O God of gods; jagat-pate — O Lord of
the universe.

You, Yourself, know Yourself as Your "Self, O Supreme Purushottama,
Source of contingent beings, Lord of contingent beings, O God of gods, and
Lord of the universe (cosmos). (10.15)

vaktum arhasy asesena divya hy atma-vibhutayah

yabhir vibhutibhir lokan imams tvam vyapya tisthasi (10.16)

Vaktum - to tell, to say, to describe; arhasi - (you) should; asesena — in detail,
in every single detail; divyah — divine; hi — indeed; atma — Your own;
vibhutayah - manifestations, glories; yabhih — by which; vibhutibhih - by glory,
glories; lokan — all worlds; iman — these; tvam — You; vyapya — pervading;
tisthasi — remain.






Describe to me, I pray, in every single detail of Your divine manifestations
by which glory You remain pervading all these worlds (planets, spheres
within the Cosmos). (10.16)

katham vidyam aham yogims tvam sada paricintayan
kesu kesu ca bhavesu cintyo 'si bhagavan maya (10.17)

katham — how; vidyam aham — shall I know (how am I to know); yogin — O
Supreme Yogi; tvam — You; sada — always; paricintayan — meditation; kesu —
in what; kesu — in what; ca - and, also; bhavesu - forms, aspects, natures ;
cintyah asi - to be thought of, to be remembered; bhagavan — O Supreme Lord;
maya — by me.

How am I to know You, O Supreme Yogi, by constant meditation? And, in
what various forms are You, O Supreme Lord, to be thought of by me?

(10.17)

vistarenatmano yogam vibhutim ca janardana

bhuyah kathaya trptir hi srnvato nasti me 'mrtam (10.18)

vistarena — in detail; atmanah — Your; yogam - yogic power; vibhutim -
manifestations, glories; ca - and, also; jana-ardana - O Janardana, Krsna;
bhuyah — again; kathaya - tell, describe; trptih - contentment, satisfaction, (I
cannot have enough); hi — for; srnvatah - listen, hearing; na asti - cannot have,
is not; me — my; amrtam - life-infusing, nectar.

Tell me again in detail, Your yogic power (creative power) and Your
manifestations, O Janardana (Krsna): For as I listen to Your life-infusing
words, I cannot have enough. (10.18)

THE SUPREME LORD 'S LISTING HIS MANIFEST A TIONS

sri-bhagavan uvaca

hanta te kathayisyami divya hy atma-vibhutayah

pradhanyatah kuru-srestha nasty anto vistarasya me (10.19)

sri-bhagavan uvaca — the Supreme Lord said; hanta - see, now very well, yes;
te — to you; kathayisyami - 1 shall explain, I shall declare, I shall speak; divyah -
- divine; hi — indeed; atma-vibhutayah - my manifestations, my glories;
pradhanyatah - in their prominences, which are principal; kuru-srestha — O best
of the Kurus, Arjuna; na asti — there is not; antah — end; vistarasya — to the
extent; me — My.






The Supreme Lord said: See, I shall now explain to you My divine
manifestations in their prominences, O best of the Kurus (Arjuna), for of the
reach there is no end. (10.19)

aham atma Gudakesa sarva-bhutasaya-sthitah

aham adis ca madhyam ca bhutanam anta eva ca (10.20)

aham — I; atma — the Self; gudakesa - O Gudakesa, O Arjuna; sarva-bhuta —
of all contingent beings; asaya-sthitah - established in the heart; aham — I am;
adih — the beginning; ca - and also; madhyam - the middle; ca - and, also;
bhutanam — of all contingent beings; antah — end; eva — even; ca — and.

O Gudakesa (Arjuna), I am the Self established in the hearts of all
contingent beings; I am the beginning, the middle, and also the end of all
contingent beings too. (10.20)

adityanam aham visnur jyotisam ravir amsuman
maricir marutam asmi naksatranam aham sasi (10.21)

adityanam — among the Adityas; aham — I am; visnuh — Vishnu; jyotisam -
among the radiances; ravih — the sun; amsu-man — radiant; maricih — Marichi;
marutam — of the Maruts (winds); asmi - (I) am; naksatranam - among the
stars; aham - (I) am; sasi — the moon.

Among the Adityas I am Vishnu; among the radiances, the resplendent
Sun; I am Marichi of the Maruts; the moon among the other stars. (10.21)

vedanam sama-vedo 'smi devanam asmi vasavah
indriyanam manas casmi bhutanam asmi cetana (10.22)

vedanam — of the Vedas; sama-vedah — the Soma Veda; asmi - (I) am;
devanam - among the Gods; asmi - (I) am; vasavah — the heavenly king
Vasava; indriyanam - among the senses; manah — the mind; ca - and, also;
asmi - (I) am; bhutanam - among contingent beings; asmi - (I) am; cetana -
consciousness, intelligence.

Of the Vedas I am the Sama-Veda; I am Vasava among the Gods (Devas);
among the senses I am the mind, among contingent beings I am
consciousness. (10.22)

rudranam sankaras casmi vitteso yaksa-raksasam
vasunam pavakas casmi meruh sikharinam aham (10.23)






rudranam - among the Rudras; sankarah — Sankara; ca - and, also; asmi - (I)
am; vitta-isah - Vittesa or Kubera; yaksa-raksasam - among the Yaksas and
Raksasas, sprites and monsters; vasunam - among the Vasus; pavakah - fire,
Pavaka; ca - and, also; asmi - (I) am; meruh — Mem; sikharinam - among the
mountains; aham — I am.

I am Siva among the Rudras (Celestial Beings, eleven in number); I am
Kubera (the Lord of Wealth) among sprites and monsters; I am fire among
the Vasus (Celestial Beings, eight in number); and, I am Meru among the
mountains. (10.23)

purodhasam ca mukhyam mam viddhi partha brhaspatim
senaninam aham skandah sarasam asmi sagarah (10.24)

purodhasam - of the priesthood, of all priests, household of priests; ca - and,
also; mukhyam — the chief; mam — Me; viddhi - observe, know; partha — O son
of Partha, Arjuna; brhaspatim — Brhaspati; senaninam - among the generals,
among the commanders; aham — I am; skandah - Skanda, God of War; sarasam
- among lakes, of all reservoirs of water; asmi — I am; sagarah — the ocean.

And of the priesthood (household of priests) observe Me, O Partha (Arjuna),
as the chief Brhaspati; among the army generals I am Skanda (God of War);
among lakes I am the Ocean. (10.24)

maharsinam bhrgur aham giram asmy ekam aksaram
yajnanam japa-yajno 'smi sthavaranam himalayah (10.25)

maha-rsinam — among the great Rishis; bhrguh — Bhrgu; aham — I am; giram —
of words; asmi - (I) am; ekam - the one; aksaram — syllable; yajnanam — of
sacrifices; japa-yajnah - the sacrifice of silent repetitions; asmi - (I) am;
sthavaranam — of the immovable things; himalayah — the Himalayan
mountains.

Among the great Rishis I am Bhrgu; of words I am the one syllable 'OM';
of sacrifices I am the offering of silent repetitions (Japa) (the japa-yajha
among the yajnas); of the immovables I am the Himalaya. (10.25)

asvatthah sarva-vrksanam devarsinam ca naradah
gandharvanam citrarathah siddhanam kapilo munih (10.26)

asvatthah - Asvattha, the fig tree, the banyan tree; sarva-vrksanam - among all
trees; deva-rsinam - among divine Rishis; ca — and; naradah — Narada;
gandharvanam - among the Gandharvas; citrarathah — Citraratha; siddhanam —






of all those who are perfected, among the Siddhas; kapilah munih — Kapila
Muni; munih — sage.

Among all trees (/ am) the Asvattha (fig tree); Narada among the divine
Rishis; Citraratha among the Gandharvas (celestial singers); among
perfected beings Kapila, the silent Muni. (10.26)

uccaihsravasam asvanam viddhi mam amrtodbhavam
airavatam gajendranam naranam ca naradhipam (10.27)

uccaihsravasam — Uccaihsravas; asvanam — among horses; viddhi — know;
mam — Me; amrta-udbhavam - born of nectar; airavatam — Airavata; gaja-
indranam - among lordly (princely) elephants; naranam — among men; ca —
and; nara-adhipam — the king.

Among horses know that I am Uccaihsravas (name of kingly horse), from
nectar born (Amrita, the nectar of immortality); among princely elephants
Airavata; and, among men I am the Monarch. (10.27)

ayudhanam aham vajram dhenunam asmi kamadhuk
prajanas casmi kandarpah sarpanam asmi vasukih (10.28)

ayudhanam — of weapons; aham — I am; vajram — the thunderbolt; dhenunam -
- among cows; asmi - (I) am; kama-dhuk - Kamadhuk, the surabhi cow, the
heavenly cow which yields all desires ; prajanah — the progenitor; ca — and;
asmi - (I) am; kandarpah - Kandarpa (Kamadev); sarpanam — among serpents;
asmi - (I) am; vasukih — Vasuki.

Of weapons I am the thunderbolt; the Kamadhenu (milk cow of desires)
among cows; I am Kandarpa (god of love) for the creators of progeny;
among serpents, I am Vasuki (the serpent king). (10.28)

anantas casmi naganam varuno yadasam aham

pitrnam aryama casmi yamah samyamatam aham (10.29)

anantah — Ananta; ca - and, also; asmi - (I) am; naganam - among Nagas;
varunah - Varuna, the deity controlling the water; yadasam - among water-
deities; aham — I am; pitrnam - among the Pitrus or ancestors; aryama —
Aryama; ca - and, also; asmi - (I) am; yamah - Yama, the controller of death;
samyamatam - among governors, regulators; aham — I am.






Among the Nagas I am Ananta; Varuna among water-dwellers; of the
ancestors I am Aryaman; among those who control I am Yama (the god of
death). (10.29)

prahladas casmi daityanam kalah kalayatam aham
mrganam ca mrgendro 'ham vainateyas ca paksinam (10.30)

prahladah — Prahlada; ca - and, also; asmi - (I) am; daityanam - Diti's (semi
human beings), or Daityas, of the demons; kalah — time; kalayatam - among
calculators, among reckoners; aham — I am; mrganam - among beasts; ca —
and; mrga-indrah — the lion, the king of beasts; aham — I am; vainateyah - son
of Vinnata, Garuda; ca - and, also; paksinam - among birds.

Among the Diti's (semi-human beings) I am Prahlada; Time among those
who calculate it; among beasts I am (the lion), the king of beasts; and,
among birds Garuda ( Visnu 's bird). (10.30)

pavanah pavatam asmi ramah sastra-bhrtam aham
jhasanam makaras casmi srotasam asmi jahnavi (10.31)

pavanah — the wind; pavatam - among purifiers; asmi - (I) am; ramah — Rama;
sastra-bhrtam - among those of wielding weapons (warriors), of the carriers of
weapons; aham — I am; jhasanam - among fishes; makarah - Makara (shark);
ca - and, also; asmi - (I) am; srotasam - flowing rivers (streams); asmi — I am;
jahnavi — the River Ganges.

Among purifiers I am the wind; Rama among those wielding weapons
(warriors); I am the crocodile among fishes, and the Jahnavi (Ganges)
among rivers. (10.31)

sarganam adir antas ca madhyam caivaham arjuna
adhyatma-vidya vidyanam vadah pravadatam aham (10.32)

sarganam — of all creations; adih — the beginning; antah - the end; ca — and;
madhyam - the middle; ca - and, also; eva — also; aham — I am; arjuna — O
Arjuna; adhyatma-vidya - the science of Self; vidyanam - among sciences;
vadah - logic, the natural conclusion; pravadatam - of those who debate, of
those who have arguments; aham — I am.

In all creation I am the beginning, the end and the middle too, O Arjuna.
Among sciences, I am the science concerning the Self. Of those who debate I
am the Speech. (10.32)






aksaranam a-karo 'smi dvandvah samasikasya ca
aham evaksayah kalo dhataham visvato-mukhah (10.33)

aksaranam - among the letters, among the alphabet; a-karah - among the first
vowel-sound, the first letter; asmi - (I) am; dvandvah — the duality; samasikasya

- among all grammatical compounds; ca — and; aham — I am; eva — verily;
aksayah - the imperishable, the inexhaustible or everlasting; kalah — time;
dhata — the creator; aham — I am; visvatah-mukhah - the all-faced, Brahman
facing all directions.

I am the first vowel-sound "A" among the alphabet; among the
grammatical compounds the duality (dvandva); I am also the imperishable
Time (Aksaya Kdla), the Creator who faces all directions. (10.33)

mrtyuh sarva-haras caham udbhavas ca bhavisyatam

kirtih srir vak ca narinam smrtir medha dhrtih ksama (10.34)

mrtyuh — death; sarva-harah — all-devouring; ca - and, also; aham — I am;
udbhavah - the prosperity, of all yet to come; ca - and, also; bhavisyatam — of
those who are to be prosperous; kirtih — fame; srih — opulence or beauty; vak —
speech; ca - and, also; narinam — of the feminine; smrtih - the memory; medha

— intelligence; dhrtih - constancy, firmness; ksama — forgiveness.

I am the all-devouring death, and the origin of all creatures yet to come.
Among the feminine (female qualities) I am fame, prosperity, speech,
memory, intelligence, constancy, and forgiveness. (10.34)

brhat-sama tatha samnam gayatri chandasam aham
masanam marga-sirso 'ham rtunam kusumakarah (10.35)

brhat-sama — the Brihat-Saman; tatha — also; samnam - among the Saman
hymns; gayatri — the Gayatri; chandasam - among metres; aham - I am;
masanam - among months; marga-sirsah - Margasirsa, the month of
November-December; aham — I am; rtunam - among seasons; kusumakarah -
among seasons the flower-bearing, spring.

Among the Saman hymns I am the Brihat-Saman; among metres the
Gayatri; among months I am Margasirsa (November-December), and
among seasons the flower-bearing (spring). (10.35)

dyutam chalayatam asmi teias teiasvinam aham

jayo 'smi vyavasayo 'smi sattvam sattvavatam aham (10.36)






dyutam — gambling; chalayatam - of the fraudulent, of the tricksters, of all
cheats; asmi - (I) am; tejah — the splendour; tejasvinam — of the splendid; aham

— I am; jay ah — victory; asmi - (I) am; vyavasayah — effort; asmi - (I) am;
sattvam — the strength, the courage, (the goodness); sattva-vatam — of the brave;
aham — I am.

I am the gambling of the tricksters; I am the splendour of the splendid; I
am victory, I am effort, and the courage of the brave. (10.36)

vrsninam vasudevo 'smi panda vanam dhananjayah
muninam apy aham vyasah kavinam usana kavih (10.37)

vrsninam — of the descendants of the Vrsnis; vasudevah - Vasudeva, Krsna in
Dvaraka; asmi - (I) am; pandavanam — among the Pandavas; dhananjayah -
Dhananjaya, Arjuna; muninam — among the sages (Munis); api — also; aham — I
am; vyasah - Vyasa ; kavinam — among the poets, the compiler of all Vedic
literature, all great thinkers; usana — Usana; kavih - the poet, the thinker.

Among the Vrsnis I am (Krsna), Vasudeva's son; Dhananjaya (Arjuna)
among the Pandavas; among the Sages (Munis) I am Vyasa, and among the
poets the poet Usana. (10.37)

dando damayatam asmi nitir asmi jigisatam

maunam caivasmi guhyanam jnanam jnanavatam aham (10.38)

dan. dah - chastisement, punishment; damayatam - among those who
discipline, among punishers; asmi - (I) am; nitih — statesmanship; asmi - (I) am;
jigisatam — of those who wish victory; maunam — silence; ca — and; eva — also;
asmi - (I) am; guhyanam - among secrets; jnanam - the knowledge; jnana-
vatam - among the knowers; aham — I am.

Among those who discipline I am the rod of chastisement; among those
wishing victory I am statesmanship; the silence of what is secret; and, the
knowledge of those who know. (10.38)

yac capi sarva-bhutanam bijam tad aham arjuna

na tad asti vina yat syan maya bhutam caracaram (10.39)

yat - which, whatever; ca - and, also; api — also; sarva-bhutanam — of all
contingent beings; bijam — seed; tat — that; aham — I am; arjuna — O Arjuna;
na — not; tat — that; asti — is; vina — without; yat — which; syat — exists; maya

— Me; bhutam — being; cara-acaram — moving and unmoving.






What is the seed of all contingent beings, that too I am, O Arjuna. There is
no being, whether moving or unmoving, that exist without Me. (See also

nanto 'sti mama divyanam vibhutinam parantapa
esa tuddesatah prokto vibhuter vistaro maya (10.40)

na — nor; antah — end; asti — is; mama — My; divyanam — of divine;
vibhutinam - manifestations, glories; parantapa - O Parantapa, O vanquisher of
foes; esah — this; tu - but, indeed; uddesatah - brief exposition; proktah - has
been stated; vibhuteh — of glory; vistarah — particulars; maya — by Me.

There is no end of My divine manifestations, O Parantapa (O vanquisher of
foes, Arjuna). What I have stated is only a brief exposition of the extent of
My glories. (10.40)

DIVINE GLORY EXPRESS IN BRIEF

yad yad vibhutimat sattvam srimad urjitam eva va

tat tad evavagaccha tvam mama tejo-'msa-sambhavam (10.41)

yat yat — whatever; vibhuti — glory; mat - endowed, having; sattvam — being;
sri-mat — prosperous; urjitam - strength, powerful; eva — also; va — or; tat tat —
that; eva — also; avagaccha — must know, be certain; tvam — you; mama — My;
tejah — of the splendour; amsa - a fragment, a part; sambhavam — born of,
deriving.

Whatever being is endowed with glory, prosperity or strength, be certain
that it derives from a fragment of My splendour. (10.41)

atha va bahunaitena kim jnatena tavarjuna
vistabhyaham idam krtsnam ekamsena sthito jagat (10.42)

atha va — or; bahuna - (by) many; etena — by this ; kim — what; jnatena —
known; tava - of you; arjuna — O Arjuna; vistabhya - supporting, pervading;
aham — I; idam — this; krtsnam — entire; eka — by one; amsena — part; sthitah —
exist; jagat — universe.

But what need is there for this detailed knowledge, O Arjuna? I stand
supporting the entire universe (cosmos) by a small fragment of Myself. (See
also ChU 3.12.06) (10.42)






In the Upanisad of the Bhagavadglta, the knowledge of Brahman the
Supreme, the science of yoga, and the dialogue between Srlkrsna and
Arjuna, this is the tenth discourse entitled, "Divine Manifestations".






Eleventh Discourse

Vision of the Cosmic Form

ARJUNA 'S SUPPLICA TION FOR A VISION OF THE COSMIC FORM

arjuna uvaca
mad-anugrahaya paramam guhyam adhyatma-samjnitam
yat tvayoktam vacas tena moho 'yam vigato mama (11.01)

arjunah uvaca — Arjuna said; mat-anugrahaya- out of compassion; paramam -
supreme, the highest; guhyam - mystery, secret; adhyatma — Adhyatma;
samjnitam - named, in the matter of; yat — which; tvaya — by You; uktam -
said, spoken; vacah — word; tena — by that; mohah — delusion; ay am — this;
vigatah - is dispelled, is removed, gone; mama — my.

Arjuna said: Out of compassion, you have taught me the supreme mystery
of the Self (Adhyatma, the distinction between the Self and the non-Self, or the
Self and the self); by this my delusion has been dispelled. (11.01)

bhavapyayau hi bhutanam srutau vistaraso maya

tvattah kamala-patraksa mahatmyam api cavyayam (11.02)

bhava - the origin; apyayau - the disolution; hi — indeed; bhutanam — of
contingent beings; srutau — have been heard; vistarasah — in detail; maya — by
me; tvattah — from You; kamala-patra-aksa — O lotus-eyed, Krsna; mahatmyam

- greatness, glories; api — also; ca — and; avyayam — inexhaustible.

For I have heard of the origin and the dissolution of contingent beings in
detail from You, O Lotus-eyed (Krsna), and also Your inexhaustible
greatness. (11.02)

evam etad yathattha tvam atmanam paramesvara
drastum icchami te rupam aisvaram Purusottama (11.03)

evam — thus; etat — this; yatha — as it is; attha — have declared; tvam — You;
atmanam — Yourself; parama-isvara — O Lord; drastum — to see; icchami - (I)
desire; te — Your; rupam — form; aisvaram — , sovereign, divine; purusa-uttama

- O Lord of Yoga, O Purusha Supreme, O Purushottama .






O Supreme Lord, as You have declared Yourself to be, so it is. However, I
desire to see Your Isvara form (Creator and Ruler of the Cosmos), O
Purushottama (Krsna). (11.03)

manyase yadi tac chakyam maya drastum iti prabho
yogesvara tato me tvam- darsayatmanam avyayam (11.04)

manyase — You think; yadi — if; tat — that; sakyam - is able, is able; maya — by
me; drastum — to be seen; iti — thus; prabho — O Lord; yoga-isvara — O Lord of
yogis; tatah — then; me — me; tvam — You; darsaya — show; atmanam — Your
Self; avyayam - imperishable, eternal.

If, O Lord, You think that It can be seen by me, do You, then, O Lord of
Yoga, show me Your imperishable Self. (11.04)

THE DIVINE EYE WHEREWITH TO SEE THE COSMIC FORM

sri-bhagavan uvaca

pasya me partha rupani sataso 'tha sahasrasah

nana-vidhani divyani nana-varnakrtini ca (11.05)

sri-bhagavan uvaca — the Supreme Lord said; pasya- see; me — My; partha — O
son of Partha, Arjuna; rupani — forms; satasah — hundreds; atha - and, also;
sahasrasah — thousands; nana-vidhani - of different sorts, various; divyani —
divine; nana — numerous; varna — colors; akrtini - shapes, forms ; ca - and,
also.

The Supreme Lord said: See, O Partha (Arjuna), My forms in their
hundreds and their thousands; various as they are, divine, numerous in
colours and shapes. (11.05)

pasyadityan vasun rudran asvinau marutas tatha
bahuny adrsta-purvani pasyascaryani Bharata (11.06)

pasya — see; adityan - the Adityas, the twelve sons of Aditi; vasun - the Vasus,
the eight Vasus; rudran - the Rudras, the eleven forms of Rudra; asvinau — the
two Asvinis; marutah - the Maruts, the forty-nine Maruts (deities of the wind);
tatha — also; bahuni — many; adrsta purvani - never seen before; pasya — see;
ascaryani - abundant wonders; bharata — O best of the Bharatas, Arjuna.

See the Adityas, the Vasus, the Rudras, the Asvins twain, and the Maruts
too. See, O Bharata (Arjuna), abundant wonders, never seen before. (11.06)






ihaika-stham jagat krtsnam pasyadya sa-caracaram
mama dehe Gudakesa yac canyad drastum icchasi (11.07)

iha — in this; eka-stham - centred in one; jagat — the universe; krtsnam —
whole; pasya — see; adya - now, today, immediately; sa — with; car a — the
moving; acaram - (and) the unmoving; mama — My; dehe — in the body;
gudakesa - O Gudakesa, O Arjuna; yat — that which; ca - and, also; anyat —
other; drastum — to see; icchasi — you wish, you want, you desire.

Here, today, see the whole universe centred in One, with all that it contains
of moving and unmoving things (seeing it) in My body, O Gudakesa
(Arjuna), and whatever else you want to see. (11.07)

na tu mam sakyase drastum anenaiva sva-caksusa

divyam dadami te caksuh pasya me yogam aisvaram (11.08)

na - not, never; tu — but; mam — Me; sakyase — are able; drastum — to see;
anena — with these; eva — even; sva-caksusa — your own eyes; divyam — divine;
dadami - (I) give; te - (to) you; caksuh - the eye; pasya — see; me — My; yogam

- yoga; aisvaram - inconceivable, supreme, lordly.

However, you are not able to see Me with these eyes of yours, I give you the
divine eye to see My Supreme Yoga. (11.08)

THE SUPREME LORD 'S COSMIC FORM

sanjaya uvaca

evam uktva tato rajan maha-yogesvaro harih

darsayam asa parthaya paramam rupam aisvaram (11.09)

sanjayah uvaca — Sanjaya said; evam — thus; uktva — saying; tatah - then,
thereafter; rajan — O King; maha-yoga-isvarah — the great Lord of yoga; harih

- Hari, Krishna; darsayam asa — showed; parthaya - to Partha, to Arjuna;
paramam — supreme; rupam - form; aisvaram - universal, sovereign, supreme.

Sanjaya said: So saying, O King, the great Lord of Yoga, Hari ( a name of
Vishnu-Krsna), revealed to Partha (Arjuna) His supreme Form as Isvara (the
Supreme, Sovereign Form). (11.09)

aneka-vaktra-nayanamanekadbhuta-darshanam
aneka-divyabharanam divyanekodyatayudham (11.10)






aneka — various; vaktra — mouths; nayanam — eyes; aneka-vaktra-nayanam -
with many mouths and eyes, with numerous mouths and eyes; aneka — various;
adbhuta — wonderful; darshanam — sights; anekadbhuta-darshanam - with
countless marvellous sights, with numerous wonderful sights; aneka — many;
divya — divine; abharanam — ornaments; aneka- divyabharanam - with many
divine ornaments, with numerous divine ornaments; divya — divine; aneka —
various; udyata — uplifted; ayudham - weapons; divyanekodyatayudham - with
many celestial weapons on high, with numerous divine weapons uplifted.

With many mouths and eyes, as well as countless marvellous sights; with
many divine ornaments, and many celestial weapons raised on high, (11.10)

divya-malyambara-dharam divya-gandhanulepanam
sarvascarya-mayam devam anantam visvato-mukham (11.11)

divya — divine; malya — garlands; ambara — dresses; dharam — wearing; divya-
malyambara-dharam - wearing celestial garlands and robes, wearing divine
garlands and apparel; divya — divine; gandha — fragrances; anulepanam —
anointed with; divya-gandhanulepanam - anointed with divine unguents,
anointed with divine fragrances; sarva — all; ascarya-mayam - the all
wonderful; devam - resplendent, shining; anantam - boundless, endless,
unlimited; visvatah-mukham - facing on all sides.

Wearing celestial garlands and robes, anointed with divine fragrances, the
God all-wonderful, resplendent, boundless, facing on all sides. (11.11)

divi surya-sahasrasya bhaved yugapad utthita

yadi bhah sadrsi sa syad bhasas tasya mahatmanah (11.12)

divi — in the sky; surya — of suns; sahasrasya - of thousands; bhavet — were;
yugapat - together, at once, simultaneously; utthita - to blaze; yadi — if; bhah
- splendour, light; sadrsi — like; sa — that; syat — would be; bhasah — brilliance;
tasya — of that; maha-atmanah - the mighty being, the great Lord, the
Mahatman.

If the splendour of thousands of suns were to blaze out together in the sky,
that would be like the brilliance of that Mahatman (of that God so great of
Self). (11.12)

tatraika-stham jagat krtsnam pravibhaktam anekadha
apasyad deva-devasya sarire pandavas tada (11.13)






tatra — there; eka-stham — in one converged, resting in one; jagat — the
universe; krtsnam - the whole, the entire; pravibhaktam — divided; anekadha —
into many groups, in multiplicity; apasyat — saw; deva-devasya — of the God of
gods; sarire — in the body; pandavah - son of Pandu, Arjuna; tada — then.

There Pandava (Arjuna) saw the entire universe in One converged, yet
divided out in multiplicity, in the body of the God of gods. (See also 13.16,
and 18.20) (11.13)

tatah sa vismayavisto hrsta-roma dhananjayah
pranamya sirasa devam krtanjalir abhasata (11.14)

tatah — then; sah — he; vismaya-avistah - filled with astonishment, being
overwhelmed with wonder, filled with wonder; hrsta-roma — with hair standing
on end; dhananjayah — Arjuna; pranamya - having prostrated; sirasa — with his
head; devam — to the Lord; krta-anjalih — with joined palms; abhasata - spoke,
speaking, began to speak.

Then he, Dhananjaya (Arjuna), filled with astonishment, his hair on end,
bowed down with his head, to the Lord in adoration, speaking with joined
palms. (11.14)

THE COSMIC FORM DEFINED

arjuna uvaca

pasyami devams tava deva dehe sarvams tatha bhuta-visesa-sanghan

brahmanam isam kamalasana-stham rsims ca sarvan uragams ca divyan

(11.15)

arjunah uvaca — Arjuna said; pasyami - (I) see; devan - the gods; tava — Your;
deva — O God; dehe — in the body; sarvan — all; tatha — also; bhuta — beings;
visesa-sanghan - varied multitudes; brahmanam — Brahma; isam - the Lord;
kamala-asana-stham - throned on the lotus-seat, sitting on the lotus flower; rsin
- rishis, sages; ca — and; sarvan — all; uragan — serpents; ca — and; divyan —
divine.

Arjuna said: Within Your Form, O God, I see all the gods, as also the
varied multitudes of beings; Brahma, the Lord throned on the lotus-seat,
and all the Rishis (Sages), and celestial serpents. (11.15)

aneka-bahudara-vaktra-netram pasyami tvam sarvato 'nanta-rupam
nantam na madhyam na punas tavadim pasyami visvesvara visva-rupa
(11.16)






aneka — many; bahu — arms; udara — bellies; vaktra — mouths; netram — eyes;
aneka-bahudara-vaktra-netram — with countless arms, stomachs, mouths and
eyes; pasyami - (I) see; tvam — You; sarvatah — on all sides; ananta-rupam -
infinite in forms, of boundless forms; na antam — no end; na madhyam — no
middle; na punah — nor again; tava — Your; adim - origin, beginning; pasyami
- (I) see; visva-isvara - O Lord of the Cosmos, O Lord of the universe; visva-
rupa - O Cosmic Form.

With countless arms, stomachs, mouths and eyes, I see You infinite in forms
on all sides. End, middle or beginning I cannot see in You, O Lord of the
Cosmos, O Cosmic Form. (11.16)

kiritinam gadinam cakrinam ca tejo-rasim sarvato diptimantam
pasyami tvam durniriksyam samantad diptanalarka-dyutim aprameyam
(11.17)

kiritinam — with crown, diadem; gadinam — with mace; cakrinam — with
discus; ca — and; tejah-rasim - a mass of magnificence, effulgence; sarvatah -
everywhere, on all sides; dipti-mantam - blazing, glowing, shining; pasyami -
(I) see; tvam — You; durniriksyam - hard to look at, difficult to see; samantat —
everywhere; dipta-anala — blazing fire; arka — of the sun; dyutim — the
sunshine; diptanalarka-dyutim — blazing as fire, as sun dazzling the gaze ,
blazing like burning fire and sun; aprameyam — immeasurable.

Your crown, mace, discus; a mass of magnificence shining everywhere, I do
see, hard to look at, blazing as fire, as sun dazzling the gaze, immeasurably
on all sides. (11.17)

tvam aksaram paramam veditavyam tvam asya visvasya param nidhanam
tvam avyayah sasvata-dharma-gopta sanatanas tvam puruso mato me
(11.18)

tvam — You; aksaram - the imperishable, the infallible; paramam - the
Supreme; veditavyam - worthy to be known, what can be known, to be
understood; tvam — You; asya - (of) this; visvasya - of universe; param - the
great, the ultimate; nidhanam - abode, treasure-house, basis; tvam — You;
avyayah - changeless, imperishable, inexhaustible; sasvata-dharma-gopta - the
guardian of the Eternal Dharma; sanatanah - ancient, immemorial; tvam — You;
purusah — Purusha; matah me - (this) is my opinion.

You are the Imperishable, the Supreme among what can be known. You are
the Ultimate Abode of the Universe, the Changeless, and Guardian of the






Eternal Dharma (law of righteousness). In my opinion, You are the
immemorial Purusha. (11.18)

THE COSMIC FORM

anadi-madhyantam ananta-viryam ananta-bahum sasi-surya-netram
pasyami tvam dipta-hutasa-vaktram sva-tejasa visvam idam tapantam
(11.19)

anadi — without beginning; madhya — middle; antam — or end; ananta -
infinite, unlimited; viryam — (in) power; ananta - numberless, unlimited;
bahum — arms; sasi — the moon; surya — and the sun; netram — eyes; pasyami -
(I) see; tvam — You; dipta — blazing; hutasa-vaktram — fire coming out of Your
mouth; sva-tejasa - (with) Your self-engendered splendour, by Your radiance;
visvam — universe; idam — this; tapantam - burning, heating.

I see You as having no beginning, middle or end, infinite in power, of
numberless arms, yours eyes the sun and moon; a flaming fire Your mouth,
burning up this whole universe with Your self-engendered splendour.
(11.19)

dyav a-prthivyor idam antaram hi vyaptam tvayaikena disas ca sarvah
drstvadbhutam rupam ugram tavedam loka-trayam pravyathitam
mahatman (11.20)

dyau - the heaven; a-prthivyoh — the earth; idam — this; antaram - interspace,
regions; hi — indeed; vyaptam - are filled; tvaya — by You; ekena — alone; disah
- quarters, directions (stretched between); ca — and; sarvah — all; drstva — by
seeing, gazing on; adbhutam — wonderful; rupam — form; ugram — terrible;
tava — Your; idam — this; loka — the worlds; tray am — three; pravyathitam -
(are) trembling; maha-atman — O All-highest Self..

O All-highest Self (Mahatman, Krsna), by You alone are filled the earth, the
heavens, and all the regions that are stretched between. Gazing on this,
Your marvellous and terrible Form, the three worlds (lokas) tremble.
(11.20)

ami hi tvam sura-sangha visanti kecid bhitah pranjalayo grnanti
svastity uktva maharsi-siddha-sanghah stuvanti tvam stutibhih
puskalabhih (11.21)

ami - these, all those; hi — verily; tvam — You; sura-sanghah - hosts of Devas
(Suras); visanti — are entering; kecit — some (f them); bhitah - terror-struck, in






fear, out of fear; pranjalayah - with joined hands, with folded hands; grnanti -
invoking, extol; svasti — all peace, all hail, may it be well; iti — thus; uktva -
having said, cry out, speaking; maha-rsi - great Rishis, great sages; siddha-
sanghah — Siddhas; maharsi-siddha-sanghah - bands of great Rishis and
Siddhas, multitude of great Rishis and Siddhas; stuvanti - praise, are singing
hymns; tvam — unto You; stutibhih — with hymns; puskalabhih - (sublime),
complete.

See, into You the hosts of Suras (supernatural beings) are entering, some
terror-struck with joined palms are invoking You. A multitude of great
Rishis and Siddhas cry out, 'AH Hail', and praise You with sublime hymns.
(11.21)

rudraditya vasavo ye ca sadhya visve 'svinau marutas cosmapas ca
gandharva-yaksasura-siddha-sangha viksante tvam vismitas caiva sarve
(11.22)

rudra — Rudras; adityah - (and) Adityas; vasavah — the Vasus; ye — , these, all
those; ca — and; sadhyah — the Sadhyas; visve — the Visvedevas; asvinau - (the
two) Aswins; marutah — the Maruts; ca — and; usma-pah — Pitrus; ca — and;
gandharva — of the Gandharvas; yaksa — the Yaksas; asura - Asuras, the
demons; siddha — Siddhas; sanghah - hosts, the assemblies; viksante - are
looking, are gazing, are beholding; tvam — You; vismitah - in amazement, in
wonder; ca — also; eva - even; sarve — all.

Rudras, Adityas, Vasus, Sadhyas, Visvadevas, Asvins, Maruts, Csmapas,
Gandharvas, Yaksas, Asuras, and Siddhas, in amazement, are gazing at
You. (11.22)

THEAWFULNESS OF THE COSMIC FORM

rupam mahat te bahu-vaktra-netram maha-baho bahu-bahuru-padam
bahudaram bahu-damstra-karalam drstva lokah pravyathitas tathaham
(11.23)

rupam — form; mahat - mighty, immeasurable, very great; te — You; bahu —
many; vaktra — mouths; netram — and eyes; maha-baho — O mighty-armed,
Krsna; bahu — many; bahu — arms; uru — thighs; padam — and feet; bahu-
udaram - with many bellies; bahu-damstra - many tusks, teeth; karalam -
gruesome, horrible; drstva — seeing; lokah - the worlds; pravyathitah - (they)
quake, perturbed; tatha - also, similarly; aham — I.






Seeing Your mighty Form, with its countless mouths, eyes, arms, thighs,
feet, bellies, and sharp, gruesome tusks, the worlds quake, and I also, O
mighty-armed (Krsna). (11.23)

nabhah-sprsam diptam aneka-varnam vyattananam dipta-visala-netram
drstva hi tvam pravyathitantar-atma dhrtim na vindami samam ca visno
(11.24)

nabhah-sprsam — touching the sky; diptam - ablaze, glowing; aneka — many;
varnam — colours; vyatta — open; ananam — mouths; dipta - shining, fiery,
glowing; visala - large, very great; netram — eyes; drstva — seeing; hi — verily;
tvam — You; pravyathita - shaken, terrified, perturbed; antah — within; atma -
at heart, (soul); pravyathitantar-atma — terrified at heart, the inmost self being
shaken; dhrtim — courage; na — not; vindami - (I) find; samam - peace, mental
tranquillity; ca - and, also; visno - O Vishnu, Krsna.

I see You ablaze with many colours touching the sky, your mouths wide
open, and large shining eyes, my inmost self is shaken. I find neither peace
nor courage, O Vishnu (Krsna). (11.24)

damstra-karalani ca te mukhani drstvaiva kalanala-sannibhani
diso najane na labhe ca sarma prasida devesa jagan-nivasa (11.25)

damstra - tusks, teeth; karalani — terrible; ca - and, also; te — Your; mukha-ni -
- mouths; drstva — seeing; eva — even; kala-anala - time's destroying death,
blazing like Pralaya-fires; sannibhani — as if; disah - (figurative:) the directions,
the quarters, it means, "find my bearings"; na — not; jane — know; na — not;
labhe — I see not, do find; ca — and; sarma - peace, grace, shelter; prasida -
have mercy; deva-isa — , O God of gods, O Lord of Devas, O Lord of all lords;
jagat-nivasa — O refuge of the universe.

I see Your mouths, terrible with tusks, resembling Time's destroying
flames: I cannot find my bearings, I see no shelter. Have mercy, O God of
gods, and refuge of the universe. (11.25)

ARJUNA 'S VISION OF THE DEFEATED ENEMIES

ami ca tvam dhrtarastrasya putrah sarve sahaivavani pala-sanghaih
bhismo dronah suta-putras tathasau sahasmadiyair api yodha-mukhyaih
(11.26)

ami — these; ca - and, also; tvam — You; dhrtarastrasya — of Dhrtarastra;
putrah — the sons; sarve — all; saha — with; eva — even; avani-pala - (host) of






kings, of warrior kings; sanghaih - host(s); bhismah — Bhlsma; dronah —
Drona; suta-putrah - Sutaputra, Kama; tatha — also; asau - this, that; saha —
with; asmadiyaih — our; api — also; yodha-mukhyaih - with foremost warriors,
chiefs among the warriors.

All the sons of Dhrtarastra along with a host of kings, Bhlsma, Drona,
Suta's royal son (Kama), and all the foremost warriors on our side, (11.26)



vaktrani te tvaramana visanti damstra-karalani bhayanakani

kecid vilagna dasanantaresu sandrsyante curnitair uttamangaih (11.27)

vaktrani — mouths; te — Your; tvaramanah - rushing, hurrying; visanti — are
entering; damstra - (horrid) tusks; karalani - horrid, terrible; bhayanakani -
frightening, fearful; kecit — some of them; vilagnah - being caught, becoming
attached; dasana-antaresu — between the teeth; sandrsyante — are being, are
found; curnitaih - crushed to powder; uttama-angaih — heads.

Rush into Your frightening mouths with their horrid tusks striking (them)
with terror. The heads of some, being caught between your teeth, are being
crushed to powder. (11.27)

yatha nadinam bahavo 'mbu-vegah samudram evabhimnukha dravanti
tatha tavami nara-loka-vira visanti vaktrany abhivijvalanti (11.28)

yatha — as; nadinam — of rivers; bahavah — many; ambu-vegah - floods, water
currents, waves of the waters; samudram - to the ocean, (towards) the sea; eva —
verily; abhimukhah — towards; dravanti - rush, flow, glide; tatha — so; tava —
Your; ami — these; nara-loka-virah - heroes of the world, heroes in the world of
men; visanti — entering; vaktrani — mouths; abhivijvalanti - blazing, flaming.

As many river floods rush headlong towards the sea, so do these heroes of
the world of men enter into Your blazing mouths. (11.28)

yatha pradiptam jvalanam patanga visanti nasaya samrddha-vegah
tathaiva nasaya visanti lokas tavapi vaktrani samrddha-vegah (11.29)

yatha — as; pradiptam — blazing; jyalanam — fire; patangah — moths; visanti —
enter; nasaya — to destruction; samrddha - hurriedly, quickened, with full;
vegah — speed; tatha eva - so only; nasaya — for destruction; visanti - enter, are
entering; lokah - creatures, all people; tava — Your; api — also; vaktrani —
mouths; samrddha-vegah - hurtling haste, with full speed.






As moths hurriedly rush into the lighted blaze for their destruction, so do
these creatures pour in a bursting, hurtling haste their own undoing into
Your mouths. (11.29)

lelihyase grasamanah samantal lokan samagran vadanair j valadbhih
tejobhir apuryajagat samagram bhasas tavograh pratapanti visno (11.30)

lelihyase — You are licking; grasamanah — devouring; samantat - everything,
on every side, from all directions; lokan - the worlds; samagran — all; vadanaih

- with mouths; jyaladbhih - blazing, flaming; tejobhih - with radiance, of light,
by effulgence; apurya - filling, covering; jagat — the universe; samagram - the
whole, all; bhasah — rays; tava — Your; ugrah - fierce, terrible; pratapanti - are
burning, are scorching; visno — O Vishnu.

You are licking up, devouring, worlds, universes, everything with Your
blazing mouths. The fiery rays of light fill the whole universe with burning
radiance, O Vishnu (Krsna). (11.30)

akhyahi me ko bhavan ugra-rupo namo 'stu te deva-vara prasida
vijnatum icchami bhavantam adyam na hi prajanami tava pravrttim
(11.31)

akhyahi - tell, explain; me — unto me; kah — who; bhavan — You; ugra-rupah —

awful in form; namah - bowing, salutations; astu — be; te — to You; deva-vara

— O God supreme, O best of gods; prasida — be merciful; vijnatum — to know;

icchami - (I) wish; bhavantam — You; adyam — the original being; na — not; hi

— indeed; prajanami - (I) know; tava — Your; pravrttim — work.

Tell me who You are, so awful in Form. I bow before You, O best of gods,
be merciful. I wish to know You as You are, the Original Being, for I do not
know Your works (pravrtti). (11.31)

THE SUPREME LORD EMBODIED AS TIME

sri-bhagavan uvaca

kalo 'smi loka-ksaya-krt pravrddho lokan samahartum iha pravrttah

rte 'pi tvam na bhavisyanti sarve ye 'vasthitah pratyanikesu yodhah (11.32)

sri-bhagavan uvaca — the Supreme Lord said; kalah — time; asmi - (I) am; loka

— of the worlds; ksaya-krt — the destroyer, laying desolate; pravrddhah -
mighty, great; lokan - the worlds; samahartum — in destroying, in consuming;
iha — here; pravrttah — engaged; rte — without, except for; api — also; tvam —
you; na - not, never; bhavisyanti — will be; sarve — all; ye — these; avasthitah —






arrayed; prati-anikesu — the opposite armies; yodhah — the warriors, the
soldiers.

The Supreme Lord said: Time am I, now engaged in laying desolate the
worlds, here ready to consume the people. Even without your involvement,
none of all the warriors arrayed there in opposite armies will escape death.
(11.32)

tasmat tvam uttistha yaso labhasva jitva satrun bhunksva rajyam

samrddham

mayaivaite nihatah purvam eva nimitta-matram bhava savya-sacin (11.33)

tasmat — therefore; tvam — you; uttistha - stand up, get up; yasah — fame;
labhasva — gain; jitva — conquering; satrun — enemies; bhunksva — enjoy;
rajyam — kingdom; samrddham - magnificent, flourishing, unrivalled; maya —
by Me; eva — even; ete — these; nihatah - slain, killed; purvam — already; eva -
even; nimitta-matram- a mere instrument; bhava — be; savya-sacin — O
Savyasaci, O left-handed, Arjuna.

Therefore, stand up, be triumphant, conquer your enemies and enjoy a
magnificent kingdom! For these are all slain by Me already. Be a mere
instrument (nimittamdtram\ O Savyasacin (Arjuna, able to shoot arrows with
the left hand). (11.33)

dronam ca bhismam cajayadratham ca karnam tathanyan api yodha-viran
maya hatams tvam jahi ma vyathistha yudhyasva jetasi rane sapatnan
(11.34)

dronam — Drona; ca - and; bhismam — Bhisma; ca - and; jayadratham —
Jayadratha; ca - and; karnam — Kama; tatha — also; anyan — others; api —
certainly; yodha-viran — great brave warriors, warriors; maya — by Me; hatan -
slain, killed; tvam — you; jahi - to kill; ma — not; vyathisthah - to be fearless, be
distressed, be disturbed; yudhyasva — just fight; jeta asi — you will conquer;
rane - in the battle, in the fight; sapatnan - rivals, enemies.

Bllsnia, Drona, Jayadratha, Kama, and all the other brave warriors here,
are already slain by Me. Kill them then fearlessly. Fight! You will conquer
your rivals in the battle. (11.34)

ARJUNA 'S A CT OF ADORA TION OF THE COSMIC FORM

sanjaya uvaca

etac chrutva vacanam kesavasya krtanjalir vepamanah kiriti






namaskrtva bhuya evaha krsnam sa-gadgadam bhita-bhitah pranamya
(11.35)

sanjayah uvaca — Sanjaya said; etat — that; srutva - hearing, having heard;
vacanam — speech; kesavasya — of Kesava, Krsna; krta-anjalih — with joined
hands; vepamanah — trembling; kiriti - the crowned one, Arjuna; namas-krtva —
prostrating; bhuyah — again; eva — even; aha - said, spoke, addressed; krsnam -

- to Krsna; sa-gadgadam - with stammering voice, in a choked voice, with a
faltering voice; bhita-bhitah - terrified, fearful, overwhelmed with fear;
pranamya - accomplishing obeisances.

Sanjaya said: having heard these words of Kesava (Krsna), he (Arjuna),
wearer of the crown, with joined palms in veneration, trembling,
prostrating himself to Krsna, spoke again, with stammering voice, and as
terrified he did obeisance. (11.35)

arjuna uvaca

sthane hrsikesa tava prakirtya jagat prahrsyaty anurajyate ca

raksamsi bhitani diso dravanti sarve namasyanti ca siddha-sanghah (11.36)

arjunah uvaca — Arjuna said; sthane - it is meet, finding its, rightly; hrsika-isa

- O Hrsikesa, Krsna, (O master of all senses); tava — Your; prakirtya - in
praise; jagat - the world; prahrsyati — is rejoicing, finding its joy; anurajyate —
is becoming attached (finding its joy); ca — and; raksamsi - Rakshasas, the
demons; bhitani - fearing, out of fear; disah — in all directions; dravanti — are
fleeing; sarve — all; namasyanti - bowing down; ca — and; siddha-sanghah —
the hosts of Siddhas.

Arjuna said: O Hrsikesa (Krsna), the world finds its pleasure and its joy in
praising You. The Rakshasas, fearing, (monsters, terrifying demons) scatter
in all directions, and all the hosts of Siddhas (perfected ones) bow down to
You. (11.36)

kasmac ca te na nameran mahatman gariyase brahmano 'py adi-kartre
ananta devesa jagan-nivasa tvam aksaram sad-asat tat param yat (11.37)

kasmat — why; ca — and; te — You; na — not; nameran — they should prostrate,
bow down; maha-atman - O Noble Soul, O Great One, Krsna; gariyase -
superior, greater; brahmanah - of Brahma; api — also; adi-kartre - the first
cause, the primal cause, the supreme creator; ananta - O Infinite, O unlimited;
deva-isa — God of gods; jagat-nivasa — O abode of the world; tvam — You are;
aksaram — imperishable; sat-asat - the being and the non-being; tat - that;
param - the supreme; yat — which.






And why should they not bow down to You, O Noble Soul (Krsna), who are
even superior to Brahma (or, 'Brahman '. The whole phrase could mean 'Most
reverend creator of Brahma or Brahman), You the First cause, Infinite, God
of gods, the world's abiding home, Unperishing Sat (Being), Asat (Non-
Being), and that which surpasses both (the Supreme). (11.37)

tvam adi-devah purusah puranas tvam asya visvasya param nidhanam
vettasi vedyam ca param ca dhama tvaya tatam visvam ananta-rupa
(11.38)

tvam — You; adi-devah — the Primal God; purusah — Purusha; puranah —
ancient; tvam — You; asya - (of) this; visvasya - of universe; param - the
supreme; nidhanam — refuge; vetta — knower; asi - (You) are; vedyam - to be
known, the knowable; ca — and; param - the supreme; ca — and; dhama -
abode, dwelling place, refuge; tvaya — by You; tatam - is pervaded, is
encompassed; visvam — the universe; ananta-rupa - O being of infinite in form,
O unlimited form.

You are the Primal God, Primeval Person, the Supreme receptacle of all
that lives, You the knower and what is to be known, the dwelling place
above (home: dhama). This entire universe is encompassed by You, Who are
Infinite in Form. (11.38)

vayur yamo 'gnir varunah sasankah prajapatis tvam prapitamahas ca
namo namas te 'stu sahasra-krtvah punas ca bhuyo 'pi namo namas te
(11.39)

vayuh - Vayu, the wind-god, air; yamah - Yama, the controller (god) of death;
agnih - Agni, fire; varunah - varuna, water; sasa-ankah — the moon; prajapatih
- Prajapati, Brahma; tvam — You; prapitamahah — the great-grandfather; ca —
and; namah - hail, salutations, my respects; namah - again hail, again my
respects; te — to You; astu — be; sahasra-krtvah — a thousand times; punah ca —
and again; bhuyah — again; api — also; namah - hail, salutations, offering
respects; namah te — offering my respects to You.

You are Vayu (the wind-god) , Yama (the god of death), Agni (the god of fire),
the moon, Varuna (water), You are Prajapati (the progenitor of beings), and
the primordial Ancestor. All hail, all hail to You, a thousandfold, again and
again all hail. (11.39)

namah purastad atha prsthatas te namo 'stu te sarvata eva sarva
ananta-viryamita-vikramas tvam sarvam samapnosi tato 'si sarvah (11.40)






namah - salutations, hail; purastat - (from) before; atha — also; prsthatah -
(from) behind; te — to You; namah - salutations, hail; astu - be; te — to You;
sarvatah - on every side, from all sides; eva — even; sarva - O All; ananta-
virya - infinite in strength, in power, unlimited potency; amita-vikramah -
limitless in competency, in power, and unlimited force; tvam — You; sarvam —
everything; samapnosi — You cover, You hold, You pervade; tatah — therefore;
asi — You are; sarvah - all, everything.

All hail to You when I stand before You, and when I stand behind You, all
hail to You wherever I may be, O All. How infinite Your strength, how
limitless Your competency! You hold everything, and are therefore All in
All. (11.40)

ARJUNA PLEADING FOR THE SUPREME LORD 'S FORGIVENESS

sakheti matva prasabham yad uktam he krsna he yadava he sakheti
ajanata mahimanam tavedam maya pramadat pranayena vapi (11.41)

sakha — friend; iti — as; matva - regarding, thinking; prasabham —
presumptuously; yat — whatever; uktam — said; he krsna — O Krsna; he yadava -

- O Yadava; he sakhe — O friend; iti — thus; ajanata - unmindful, unknowing,
without knowing; mahimanam - majesty, greatness, glories; tava — Your; idam

— this; maya — by me; pramadat - carelessness, out of foolishness; pranayena -
in the fondness of my love, out of love; va api - either.

How thoughtlessly have I called You friend, for so I thought of You,
unmindful of Your majesty, I addressed you as O Krsna, O Yadava, O
Friend, carelessly in the fondness of my love. (11.41)

yac cavahasartham asat-krto 'si vihara-sayyasana-bhojanesu

eko 'tha vapy acyuta tat-samaksam tat ksamaye tvam aham aprameyam

(11.42)

yat — whatever; ca — also; avahasa-artham — for joking, for the sake of fun;
asat-krtah - disrespectfully, dishonored; asi — You are; vihara - resting, in
relaxation; sayya — in lying down; asana — in sitting; bhojanesu - or at meals,
or while eating together; ekah — alone; atha va — or; api — even; acyuta — O
Achyuta, O infallible one, Krsna; tat-samaksam - in company, among
companions, at sight of others; tat — that; ksamaye - begging forgiveness, ask
forgiveness; tvam — from You; aham — I; aprameyam - immeasurable.






Sometimes joking I showed disrespect to You, when we played, rested, sat
in an assembly or at meals, sometimes together (both alone), or at sight of
others, O Achyuta (Krsna), the Immeasurable, I beg Your forgiveness.
(11.42)

pitasi lokasya caracarasya tvam asya pujyas ca gurur gariyan
na tvat-samo 'sty abhyadhikah kuto 'nyo loka-traye 'py apratima-
prabhava (11.43)

pita — the father; asi — You are; lokasya — of the world; cara — moving;
acarasya — and unmoving; tvam — You are; asya — of this; pujyah - to be
honoured, to be referred, worshipable; ca — also; guruh — guru; gariyan —
greatest; na — never; tvat-samah — equal to You; asti — is; abhyadhikah -
greater, surpassing; kutah - how could there be, how is it possible; anyah —
other; loka-traye — in the three worlds; api — also; apratima-prabhava - Most
excellent your power, O immeasurable power, O being of unequalled power.

You are the Father of the moving and unmoving world, You are worthy of
all honour, the greatest guru of the world. There is none like You, how
could there be a greater? Most excellent Your power in the three worlds.
(11.43)

tasmat pranamya pranidhaya kayam prasadaye tvam aham isam idyam
piteva putrasya sakheva sakhyuh priyah priyayarhasi deva sodhum (11.44)

tasmat — therefore; pranamya - bowing, saluting; pranidhaya - prostrating,
having bent, laying down; kayam — body; prasadaye - longing grace, crave for
forgiveness, to beg mercy; tvam — to You; aham — I; isam - O Lord; idyam —
adorable; pita iva — like a father; putrasya — with a son; sakha iva — like a
friend; sakhyuh — with a friend; priyah — a lover; priya-yah — with the
dearmost; arhasi — You should; deva - O Lord; sodhum — bear.

Therefore, bowing down to You, prostrating my body, longing grace of
You, O Adorable Lord; bear with me, I pray you, as father with son, or
friend with friend, or lover with the one he loves. (11.44)

ARJUNA PLEADING FOR THE SUPREME LORD'S RETURN TO HIS

USUAL FORM

adrsta-purvam hrsito 'smi drstva bhayena ca pravyathitam mano me
tad eva me darsaya deva rupam prasida devesa jagan-nivasa (11.45)






adrsta-purvam - that which no one has seen before, never seen before; hrsitah -
ecstatic, delighted, gladdened; asmi - (I) am; drstva - having seen, by seeing;
bhayena -by fear, out of fear; ca — and; pravyathitam - is possessed, is
distressed, perturbed; manah — mind; me — my; tat — that; eva — only; me — to
me; darsaya — show; deva — O God; rupam — form; prasida- forgive (me), have
mercy, be gracious; deva-isa — O Lord of gods; jagat-nivasa — O refuge of the
universe, O abode of the universe, O home of the universe .

I have seen that which no one has seen before, and ecstatic is my joy; yet my
mind is possessed by fear and trembling. Show me, O God, Your other form
again, forgive me, O God of gods, Home of the universe! (11.45)

kiritinam gadinam cakra-hastam icchami tvam drastum aham tathaiva
tenaiva rupena catur-bhujena sahasra-baho bhava visva-murte (11.46)

kiritinam — crowned; gadinam — with mace; cakra-hastam — discus in hand;
icchami - (I) wish; tvam — You; drastum — to see; aham — I; tatha eva - as
before; tena eva - that same,in that, take up again; rupena — form; catuh-
bhujena — four-handed; sahasra-baho — O thousand-armed ; bhava — be; visva-
murte - to whom every form belongs.

Crowned, with the mace and discus in Your hand, I wish to see You as
before; take up again Four-armed form, O Thousand-armed, to whom
every form belongs. (11.46)

ARJUNA 'S BLESSED PRIVILEGE

sri-bhagavan uvaca

maya prasannena tavarjunedam rupam param darsitam atma-yogat

tejo-mayam visvam anantam adyam yan me tvad anyena na drsta-purvam

(11.47)

sri-bhagavan uvaca — the Supreme Lord said; maya — by Me; prasannena -
favour, gracious; tava — to you; arjuna — O Arjuna; idam — this; rupam — form;
param — supreme; darsitam - demonstrating, shown; atma-yogat - My Self s
mysterious power, by my own yoga power; tejah-mayam - glorious, full of
splendour; visvam - all-embracing, universal; anantam - infinite, endless,
unlimited; adyam - primeval, original; yat — which; me — My; tvat anyena -
except you, besides you; na drsta-purvam - seen before, no one has previously
seen.

The Supreme Lord said: I desired to show you favour, Arjuna,
demonstrating to you My Self s mysterious power (dtmayoga) in its All-






highest Form, glorious, all-embracing, infinite, primeval, which none has
seen before except you. (11.47)

na veda-yajnadhyayanair na danair na ca kriyabhir na tapobhir ugraih
evam-rupah sakya aham nr-loke drastum tvad anyena kuru-pravira
(11.48)

na - not, never; veda-yajna — by sacrifice; adhyayanaih — or Vedic study; na
veda-yajnadhyayanaih - by the study of the Vedas and of Yajna; na - not,
never; danaih — by charity, by gifts, by giving of alms; na - not, never; ca —
and; kriyabhih — by rituals; na - not, never; tapobhih - by sharp austerities, by
serious penances; ugraih — severe; evam-rupah — in such a form; sakyah - (am)
possible; aham — I; nr-loke — in the world of man; drastum - to to reveal, be
seen; tvat — than you; anyena — by another; kuru-pravira - O great hero of the
Kurus, O best among the Kuru warriors.

Not by the Vedas, not by sacrifice, not by deep study or the giving of alms,
not by rituals or sharp austerity, can I be seen in such a form in the world
of men: to you alone I have revealed it, O hero of the Kurus (Arjuna).
(11.48)

ma te vyatha ma ca vimudha-bhavo drstva rupam ghoram idrn mamedam
vyapeta-bhih prita-manah punas tvam tad eva me rupam idam prapasya
(11.49)

ma - do not, et it not be; te - (to) you; vyatha - tremble, fear; ma — not ; ca -
and, also; vimudha-bhavah - bewilderment, perplexed; drstva - having seen, by
seeing; rupam — form; ghoram - awful, terrible, horrible; idrk - this, such, as it
is; mama — My; idam — this; vyapeta-bhih - banish all fear, free from all fear;
prita-manah - rejoicing heart, pleased in mind; punah — again; tvam — you; tat -
- that; eva — even; me — My; rupam — form; idam — this; prapasya - see,
behold.

Do not tremble nor be perplexed, because you have seen this awful Form of
Mine. Banish all fear, and let your heart rejoice: see again that same
familiar form of Mine. (11.49)

THE RETURN TO THE GENTLE HUMAN FORM

sanjaya uvaca

ity arjunam vasudevas tathoktva svakam rupam darsayam asa bhuyah

asvasayam asa ca bhitam enam bhutva punah saumya-vapur mahatma

(11.50)






sanjayah uvaca — Sanjaya said; iti — thus; arjunam — to Arjuna; vasudevah -
Vasudeva, Krsna; tatha — so; uktva - having spoken; svakam — His own; rupam
— form; darsayam asa — showed; bhuyah — again; asvasayam asa - consoled,
encouraged; ca — and; bhitam - who was terrified; enam — him; bh utva —
becoming; punah — again; saumya-vapuh - of gentle form; maha-atma — the
Noble Soul, Krsna.

Sanjaya said: having so spoken, the son of Vasudeva (Krsna) showed
Arjuna His own form again; and the Noble Soul (Mahatman, the great-souled
one, Krsna) assumed the body of a friend, and consoled him who was
terrified. (11.50)

arjuna uvaca

drstvedam manusam rupam tava saumyam janardana

idanim asmi samvrttah sa-cetah prakrtim gatah (11.51)

arjunah uvaca — Arjuna said; drstva - having seen; idam — this; manusam —
human; rupam — form; tava — Your; saumyam — gentle; janardana - O
Janardana, O chastiser of the enemies, Krsna; idanim — now; asmi - (I) am;
samvrttah — settled; sa-cetah - with mind; prakrtim - to nature, to my own
nature, to my normal state; gatah — returned.

Arjuna said: Now that I see Your gentle human form again, O Janardana
(Krsna), I have returned to my senses, and to my normal state. (11.51)

THE MESSAGE OF THE COSMIC FORM

sri-bhagavan uvaca

su-durdarsam idam rupam drstavan asi yan mama

deva apy asya rupasya nityam darshana-kanksinah (11.52)

sri-bhagavan uvaca — the Supreme Lord said; su-durdarsam - very hard to see,
very difficult to see; idam — this; rupam — form; drstavan asi - which you have
seen; yat — which; mama - My, of Mine; devah — gods; api — also; asya — this;
rupasya - of form; nityam - perpetually, eternally; darshana-kanksinah -
longing to see, desiring to see, aspiring to see.

The Supreme Lord said: This, My Form which you have seen is very hard
to see. Truly, this is the form the gods (devas) themselves are perpetually
longing to see. (11.52)






naham vedair na tapasa na danena na cejyaya

sakya evam-vidho drastum drstavan asi mam yatha (11.53)

na - not, never; aham — I; vedaih - by the Vedas; na - not, never; tapasa - by
austerity, by serious penances; na - not, never; danena - by gift, by the giving
of alms, by charity; na - not, never; ca — and; ijyaya - by sacrifice, by worship,
by performance of rituals; sakyah — it is possible, can be; evam-vidhah — like
this; drastum - to be seen; drstavan - seeing; asi — you are; mam — Me; yatha —
as.

Not by the Vedas or austerity, not by the giving of alms or the performance
of rituals can I be seen in the way you just saw Me. (11.53)

bhaktya tv ananyaya sakya aham evam-vidho 'rjuna
jnatum drastum ca tattvena pravestum ca Parantapa (11.54)

bhaktya — by devotion; tu — indeed; ananyaya - single-minded (to Me alone);
sakyah — possible; aham — I; evam-vidhah - in such a form; arjuna — O Arjuna;
jnatum - to be known; drastum - to be seen; ca — and; tattvena — in reality;
pravestum — to enter into; ca — and; parantapa - O Parantapa, O vanquisher of
foes, Arjuna.

But, by devotion to Me alone can I be known and seen in such a Form and
as I really am, then so enter into Me, O Parantapa (Arjuna, O vanquisher of
foes). (11.54)

THE WHOLE TEACHING OF THE GITA SUMMARISED

mat-karma-krn mat-paramo mad-bhaktah sanga-varjitah
nirvairah sarva-bhutesu yah sa mam eti Pandava (11.55)

mat-karma-krt - perform actions for Me; mat-paramah - looks on Me as the
supreme, considering Me as the Supreme, making me your highest goal; mat-
bhaktah - is devoted to Me, being loyal in love to Me; sanga-varjitah - is freed
from attachment, being unattached; nirvairah — without an enmity, without
hatred; sarva-bhutesu - towards all creatures, for any being at all, for all
contingent beings; yah — who; sah — he; mam — to Me; eti — comes; pandava -
O Pandava, O son of Pandu, Arjuna.

Perform actions for Me, and make Me your highest goal, be loyal in love
(bhakta) to me, be unattached, have no hatred for any being at all: for all
who do so come to Me, O Pandava (Arjuna). (See also 8.22) (11.55)






In the Upanisad of the Bhagavadglta, the knowledge of Brahman the

Supreme, the science of yoga, and the dialogue between Srlkrsna and

Arjuna, this is the eleventh discourse entitled, "Vision of the Cosmic Form".






Twelfth Discourse

Bhakti Yoga

THE WORSHIP OF ISVARA (THE SUPREME LORD) OR AKSARA (THE

ETERNAL)

arjuna uvaca

evam satata-yukta ye bhaktas tvam paryupasate

ye capy aksaram avyaktam tesam ke yoga-vittamah (12.01)

arjunah uvaca — Arjuna said; evam — thus; satata - ever, always; yuktah -
steadfast, integrated, engaged; ye — those who; bhaktah — devotees; tvam —
You; paryupasate — worship; ye — those who; ca — and; api — also; aksaram -
the imperishable; avyaktam — the unmanifested; tesam — of them; ke — which;
yoga-vit-tamah - better knowers of yoga.

Arjuna said: Those devotees who are ever integrated, and serve You with
unswerving devotion (bhakta), and others who worship the Imperishable
Unmanifested, which of them are better knowers of Yoga? (12.01)

THE WORSHIPPERS OF ISVARA (THE SUPREME LORD)

sri-bhagavan uvaca

mayy avesya mano ye mam nitya-yukta upasate

sraddhaya parayopetas te me yuktatama matah (12.02)

sri-bhagavan uvaca — the Supreme Lord said; mayi — on Me; avesya — fixing;
manah — the mind; ye — those who; mam — Me; nitya - ever, always; yuktah -
steadfast, integrated, engaged; upasate — worship; sraddhaya — with faith;
paraya - (with) supreme; upetah — endowed; te — they; me — by Me; yukta-
tamah - the best versed in yoga, most perfect in yoga, the best among; matah -
(in my) opinion.

The Supreme Lord said: Those who fix their minds on Me, most integrated,
worshipping Me filled with supreme faith (supreme Sraddha, transcendental
faith) are, in My opinion, the best among yogis. (See also 6.47) (12.02)

THE WORSHIPPERS OF AKSARA BRAHMA, THE CAUSE OF CAUSES

ye tv aksaram anirdesyam avyaktam paryupasate
sarvatra-gam acintyam ca kuta-stham acalam dhruvam (12.03)






ye — those who; tu — verily; aksaram - the imperishable; anirdesyam —
indefinable; avyaktam — unmanifested; paryupasate — worship; sarvatra-gam —
all-pervading; acintyam - unthinkable, inconceivable; ca — and; kuta-stham —
unchanging; acalam - permanent, immovable; dhruvam - the eternal.

Those who worship the Undefined, the Imperishable Unmanifested, the All-

pervading and Unthinkable, the Unchanging, the Permanent and Eternal,

(12.03)

The Supreme Lord said: Those who fix their minds on Me, most integrated,

worshipping Me filled with supreme faith (supreme Sraddha, transcendental

faith) are, in My opinion, the best among yogis. (See also 6.47) (12.02)

sanniyamyendriya-gramam sarvatra sama-buddhayah
te prapnuvanti mam eva sarva-bhuta-hite ratah (12.04)

sanniyamya - having restrained; indriya-gramam — all the senses; sarvatra —
everywhere; sama-buddhayah - equal-minded, equally disposed; te — they;
prapnuvanti - attain, achieve; mam — Me; eva — only; sarva-bhuta-hite — for
the welfare of all living beings, (with) the welfare of others, in the welfare of all
beings; ratah - engaged, concerned (with).

Having restrained all the senses, in all things equal-minded, concerned with
the welfare of others, they also attain Me. (12.04)

REASONS FOR WORSHIPPING A PERSONAL FORM OF THE

SUPREME

kleso 'dhikataras tesam avyaktasakta-cetasam

avyakta hi gatir duhkham dehavadbhir avapyate (12.05)

klesah - difficulty, trouble; adhika-tarah - (is) greater, very much; tesam — of
those; avyakta — to the unmanifested; asakta - cling, set, attached; cetasam — of
those whose minds; avyakta — toward the unmanifested; hi — for; gatih — goal;
duhkham - is hard, with trouble; deha-vadbhih — for the embodied; avapyate —
is reached.

But, greater is the difficulty of those whose minds cling to the
Unmanifested; for the goal of the Unmanifested is hard for the embodied
being to reach. (12.05)






SALVATION BY WORSHIP OF ISVARA (THE SUPREME LORD)

ye tu sarvani karmani mayi sannyasya mat-parah
ananyenaiva yogena mam dhyayanta upasate (12.06)

ye — those who; tu — but; sarvani — all; karmani — actions; mayi — to Me;
sannyasya — renouncing, giving up; mat-parah - solely intent to Me, being
attached to Me; ananyena - solely intent, single-minded, without division; eva —
even; yogena - with yoga, supreme goal (yogena, brought en rapport with the
remainder of the sentence); mam — Me; dhyayantah — meditating; upasate -
worship.

However, those who renounce their every action to Me, solely intent on Me
as the Supreme Goal, and worship Me, meditating on Me, with steadfast
devotion, (12.06)

tesam aham samuddharta mrtyu-samsara-sagarat
bhavami na cirat Partha mayy avesita-cetasam (12.07)

tesam - for them; aham — I; samuddharta - lifting up, the saviour, the deliverer;
mrtyu — of death; samsara — in material existence; sagarat — from the ocean;
mrtyu-samsara-sagarat - out of the ocean of the mortal samsara (the round of
birth, death, and rebirth); bhavami - (I )become; na — not; cirat — after a long
time; partha — O son of Partha, Arjuna; mayi — on Me; avesita — fixed; cetasam
— of those whose minds.

These I will soon lift up on high out of the ocean of the mortal samsara (the

round of birth, death and rebirth), O Partha (Arjuna), for their minds are
fixed on Me. (12.07)

mayy eva mana adhatsva mayi buddhim nivesaya
nivasisyasi mayy eva ata urdhvam na samsayah (12.08)

mayi — on Me; eva — certainly; manah — mind; adhatsva — fix; mayi - in Me;
buddhim - (your) intellect; nivesaya - abode, place; nivasisyasi — you will live;
mayi — in Me; eva — alone; atah urdhvam - hereafter, thereafter; na - not,
never; samsayah — doubt.

Fix your mind on Me only, and let your intellect dwell within Me; then in
very truth (eva) you will abide hereafter in Me alone. (12.08)






ABHYASA-YOGA

atha cittam samadhatum na saknosi mayi sthiram
abhyasa-yogena tato mam icchaptum Dhananjaya (12.09)

atha — if; cittam — mind; samadhatum — to fix; na — not; saknosi — you are
able; mayi — on Me; sthiram — steadily; abhyasa-yogena — by the yoga of
constant practice; tatah — then; mam — Me; iccha - long, wish, desire; aptum -
to reach, to get; dhanam-jaya - O Dhananjaya, O winner of wealth, Arjuna.

But, if you are unable to fix firmly your mind (citta) on Me, then long to
reach Me by the practise of Abhyasa-yoga (any other spiritual discipline and
exercises for self-realisation, also the act of listening to the teaching of the srutis
(sacred knowledge, especially the Upanishads) with a view to obtain knowledge;
or, the practise of dhyana with a firm resolve.), O Dhananjaya (Arjuna).
(12.09)

SERVICE TO THE SUPREME LORD

abhyase 'py asamartho 'si mat-karma-paramo bhava
mad-artham api karmani kurvan siddhim avapsyasi (12.10)

abhyase — in practice; api — also; asamarthah - incapable, unable; asi — you
are; mat-karma - intent to work; paramah — dedicated to; mat-karma-paramah -

— intent on doing actions for my sake, work for me; bhava - become, making;
mat-artham — for My sake; api — also; karmani — actions; kurvan —
performing; siddhim — perfection; avapsyasi - you will attain, you will achieve.

If you are incapable even to practise Abhyasa-yoga, then work and act for
Me, making this your intent. Even by performing all actions for Me, you
will attain perfection. (See also 9.27, 18.46) (12.10)

ABANDONING THE FRUITS OF ACTIONS

athaitad apy asakto 'si kartum mad-yogam asritah
sarva-karma-phala-tyagam tatah kuru yatatmavan (12.11)

atha — even if; etat — this; api — also; asaktah — unable; asi - (you) are; kartum

— to do; mat — my; yogam - devotion, yoga; asritah - refuged in, for me alone;
sarva-karma — of all actions; phala — of the fruit; tyagam — renunciation;
sarva-karma-phala-tya.ga.rn — the renunciation of the fruits of all actions; tatah

— then; kuru — do; yata-atma-van — self-controlled.






Then, even if you are unable to do this, then gird up your loins in devotion
for Me alone (reading udygam with some MSS for mad-yogam), and self-
controlled, renounce the fruits of your actions. (12.11)

KARMA YOGA (RENUNCIATION) IS THE BEST START

sreyo hi jnanam abhyasaj jnanad dhyanam visisyate

dhyanat karma-phala-tyagas tyagac chantir anantaram (12.12)

sreyah — better; hi — indeed; jnanam — knowledge; abhyasat — than practice;
jnanat — than knowledge; dhyanam — meditation; visisyate — is considered
better; dhyanat — than meditation; karma-phala-tyagah — renunciation of the
fruits of actions; tyagat — from renunciation; santih — peace; anantaram —
immediately.

For better is knowledge than mere practise, better than knowledge is
meditation; and better than meditation is the renunciation of the fruits of
actions: renunciation leads immediately to peace. (See more on
renunciation in 18.02, and 18.09) (12.12)

THE QUALITIES OF A DEVOTEE

advesta sarva-bhutanam maitrah karuna eva ca

nirmamo nirahankarah sama-duhkha-sukhah ksami (12.13)

advesta - not hating; sarva-bhutanam — toward contingent beings; maitrah —
friendly; karunah - compassionate, kindly; eva — even; ca — and; nirmamah -
without attachment; nirahankarah — without egoism; sama — equal; duhkha —
in distress, in pain; sukhah — and happiness, and in pleasure; ksam i -
forbearing, forgiving.

Let him feel hatred for no contingent being, but be friendly and
compassionate, without attachment and egoism, remaining the same in
pleasure as in pain, and forbearing. (12.13)

santustah satatam yogi yatatma drdha-niscayah

mayy arpita-mano-buddhir yo mad-bhaktah sa me priyah (12.14)

santustah - contented, satisfied; satatam - ever, always; yogi - the practitioner;
yata-atma — self-controlled; drdha-niscayah - possessed with solid conviction,
with determination; mayi — on Me; arpita - dedicated, integrated, engaged;
manah — mind; buddhih — and intellect; yah — who; mat-bhaktah — My
devotee; sah — he; me — to Me; priyah — dear.






Ever content and integrated, self-controlled, possessed with solid
conviction, with mind and intellect steeped in Me, he, My devotee, is dear to
Me. (12.14)

yasman nodvijate loko lokan nodvijate ca yah
harsamarsa-bhayodvegair mukto yah sa ca me priyah (12.15)

yasmat — from whom; na - not, never; udvijate - is agitated; lokah - the world;
lokat — from the world; na - not, never; udvijate — is agitated; ca — and; yah —
who; harsa - (from) joy, exaltation; amarsa — envy; bhaya — fear; udvegaih —
and anxiety, disquiet; muktah — freed; yah — who; sah — he; ca — and; me — to
Me; priyah — dear.

He, by whom the world is not afflicted, and who does not afflict the world,
who is free from exaltation, envy, fear and disquiet, he is likewise dear to
Me. (12.15)

anapeksah sucir daksa dasino gata-vyathah
sarvarambha-parityagi yo mad-bhaktah sa me priyah (12.16)

anapeksah - unconcerned, free from wants, neutral; sucih — pure; daksah -
skilled, expert; udasinah - indifferent, free from care, unconcerned; gata-
vyathah - no worrying, untroubled, freed from all distress; sarva-arambha -
(renouncing) every (selfish) undertaking, of all endeavors; parityagi -
renouncer, renouncing; yah — who; mat-bhaktah — My devotee; sah — he; me —
to Me; priyah — dear.

He who is unconcerned, pure, skilled, indifferent, who is not worrying,
renouncing every selfish initiative, he, My devotee, is dear to Me. (12.16)

yo na hrsyati na dvesti na socati na kanksati
subhasubha-parityagi bhaktiman yah sa me priyah (12.17)

yah — who; na - not, never; hrsyati - rejoices, takes pleasure; na - not, never;
dvesti — hates; na - not, never; socati -grieves, laments; na - not, never;
kanksati — desires; subha — of the good, fortune; asubha - evil, misfortune;
parityagi — renouncing; bhakti-man - full of devotion; yah — who; sah - he ; me
— to Me; priyah — dear.

He who neither rejoices, nor hates, nor grieves, nor desires, renouncing
fortune and misfortune, who is full of devotion (bhaktimat), he is dear to Me.

(12.17)






samah satrau ca mitre ca tatha manapamanayoh
sitosna-sukha-duhkhesu samah sanga-vivarjitah (12.18)

samah - the same, alike, equal; satrau — to enemy; ca — and; mitre - to friend;
ca — and; tatha - as, also; mana — in honour; apamanayoh — and dishonour; sita

- in cold; usna — heat; sukha — pleasure; duhkhesu — and pain; samah - alike,
the same ; sanga-vivarjitah — free from all attachment.

He who is alike to enemies and friends, as well as towards honour and
dishonour, alike in cold and heat, in pleasure as in pain, and who is free
from attachment, (12.18)

tulya-ninda-stutir mauni santusto yena kenacit
aniketah sthira-matir bhaktiman me priyo narah (12.19)

tulya - unmoved, equal; ninda - in blame, in defamation; stutih — and praise;
mauni — silent; santustah - satisfied, contented; yena kenacit — with anything,
with whatever; aniketah - homeless, having no residence, who does not care for
any residence, and satisfied with whatever comes his way; sthira matih - steady-
minded; bhakti-man - full of devotion; me — to Me; priyah — dear; narah - that
man.

Unmoved by praise and blame, who is silent, homeless, satisfied with
whatever comes his way, steady-minded, full of devotion, that man is dear
to Me. (12.19)

THE IMPORTANCE OF DEVELOPING SPIRITUAL QUALITIES

ye tu dharmamrtam idam yathoktam paryupasate
sraddadhana mat-parama bhaktas te 'tiva me priyah (12.20)

ye — who; tu — but; dharma — dharma; amrtam - life-giving, nectar;
dharmamrtam — immortal dharma, life-giving knowledge; idam — this; yatha —
as; uktam - taught, declared, said; paryupasate - partake, follow, completely
engage; sraddadhanah — with full of faith, endued with Shraddha; mat-paramah

- making Me their goal, regarding Me as their supreme; bhaktah — devotees; te -

- they; ativa - especially, exceedingly; me — to Me; priyah — dear.

But, those who partake in this life-giving knowledge (amrita- dharma) as
taught above, full of faith, making Me their goal, and devoted, they are
especially dear to Me. (12.20)






In the Upanisad of the Bhagavadglta, the knowledge of Brahman the

Supreme, the science of yoga, and the dialogue between Srlkrsna and

Arjuna, this is the twelfth discourse entitled, "Bhakti Yoga".






Thirteenth Discourse

The Field and the Knower (Matter and Spirit)

PRAKRITIAND PURUSHA COMPRISE EVERYTHING

arjuna uvaca

prakrtim purusam caiva ksetram ksetra-jnam eva ca

etad veditum icchami jnanam jneyam ca Kesava (Most MSS omit this verse.)

arjunah uvaca — Arjuna said; Prakrtim - the Prakriti, nature; Purusam — the
Purusha; ca — and; eva — even; ksetram — the field; ksetra-jnam — the knower
of the field; eva — even; ca — and; etat — this; veditum - to know, to understand;
icchami - (I) wish; jnanam — knowledge; jneyam — the object of knowledge,
what ought to be known; ca — and; kesava — O Kesava, Krsna.

Arjuna said: What is Prakriti and Purusha (Matter and Spirit)! What is the
'Field' and what is the "Knower of the Field'? Also, what is knowledge and
that which ought to be known? These, Kesava (Krsna), I would like to know.

(Most MSS omit this verse.)

UNIQUENESS OF THE 'FIELD' AND THE 'KNOWER OF THE FIELD

sri-bhagavan uvaca
idam sariram Kaunteya ksetram ity abhidhiyate
etad yo vetti tarn prahuh ksetra-jna iti tad-vidah (13.01)

sri-bhagavan uvaca - the Supreme Lord said; idam — this; sariram — body;
kaunteya - O Kaunteya, O son of Kunti; ksetram — the field; iti — thus;
abhidhiyate — is called; etat — this; yah — who; vetti — knows; tarn — him;
prahuh - is called; ksetra-jnah — the knower of the field; iti — thus; tat-vidah —
by those who know that.

The Supreme Lord said: This body, O son of Kunti (Arjuna), is called the
'Field' (ksetra), and he who knows it, is the 'Knower of the Field'
(ksetrajha), by the Sages who understand these things. (13.01)

ksetra-jnam capi mam viddhi sarva-ksetresu bharata
ksetra-ksetrajnayor jnanam yat taj jnanam matam mama (13.02)

ksetra-jnam — the knower of the field; ca — and; api — also; mam — Me; viddhi -
- know; sarva — all; ksetresu - in all fields; bharata — O son of Bharata, Arjuna;






ksetra - of the field; ksetra-jnayoh — and the knower of the field; jnanam -
knowledge of; yat — which; tat — that; jnanam — knowledge; matam — opinion;
mama — My.

Recognise Me as the Knower of the Field in all Fields (ksetras), O Bharata
(Arjuna). Knowledge of the Field and the Knower of the Field is in My
opinion true knowledge. (13.02)

PRECIS OF THE TEACHING

tat ksetram yac ca yadrk ca yad-vikari yatas ca yat
sa ca yo yat-prabhavas ca tat samasena me srnu (13.03)

tat — that; ksetram — field; yat — what; ca — and; yadrk - what it is; ca — and;
yat - what its; vikari — modifications; yatah - (from) which; ca — and; yat —
what; sah — he; ca — and; yah — who; yat - what; prabhavah - (what his)
powers; ca — and; tat — that; samasena — in brief; me — from Me; srnu - hear.

What the Field (ksetra) is and what it is like, what its modifications
(changes, associations, transformations) are and which derives from which,
and who He is (ksetrajna, the Knower of the Field), and what his powers (var:
nature) are, hear now briefly from Me. (13.03)

THE VEHICLES OF REVELATION, THE TEACHING EXTOLLED

rsibhir bahudha gitam chandobhir vividhaih prthak
brahma-sutra-padais caiva hetumadbhir viniscitaih (13.04)

rsibhih - by Rishis, by the wise sages; bahudha — in many ways; gitam — sung;
chandobhih — by Vedic hymns, in chants; vividhaih — various; prthak —
distinctive; brahma-sutra padaih - (and) in suggestive verses of Brahman;
padaih — ca — and; eva — even; hetu-madbhih - full of reasoning; viniscitaih —
persuasive.

In different ways has it been sung by Rishis, in various distinctive hymns,
and in suggestive verses about Brahman (Brahma-sutra short terse sayings
concerning the Supreme Being), full of reasoning and persuasiveness. (13.04)

THE CONSTITUENTS OF THE 'FIELD' (KSETRA), MATTER IN ALL

ITS FORMS

maha-bhutany ahankaro buddhir avyaktam eva ca
indriyani dasaikam ca panca cendriya-gocarah (13.05)






maha-bhutani — the great elements; ahankarah — ego; buddhih — intellect;
avyaktam — the unmanifested; eva — even; ca — and; indriyani — the senses;
dasa- - ten; etem — one; ca — and; panca — five; ca — and; indriya-go-carah —
the objects of the senses.

The great elements, the ego (ahamkara), intellect (buddhi), the
Unmanifested, the ten senses and the one, and the five sense-objects of the
senses (the five organs of knowledge, or senses, the five organs of action, the
mind, and the objects cognised by each of the five senses); (13.05)

iccha dvesah sukham duhkham sanghatas cetana dhrtih
etat ksetram samasena sa-vikaram udahrtam (13.06)

iccha — desire; dvesah — hatred; sukham — pleasure; duhkham — pain;
sanghatah — the aggregate; cetana — intelligence; dhrtih - constancy, fortitude;
etat — this; ksetram — field; samasena — briefly; sa-vikaram — with
modifications; udahrtam - are called, been described.

Desire, hate, pleasure, pain, combination (the body), intelligence, and
constancy - these, briefly, are called the 'field' together with its associations
(modifications, transformations). (See also 7.04) (13.06)

SELF-CULTURE ENCOURAGING SELF-KNOWLEDGE

amanitvam adambhitvam ahimsa ksantir arjavam
acaryopasanam saucam sthairyam atma-vinigrahah (13.07)

amanitvam — humility; adambhitvam - modesty, pridelessness; ahimsa - non-
violence; ksantih — forgiveness; ariavam — uprightness; acarya-upasanam -
service of the teacher; saucam — purity; sthairyam - steadfastness, resoluteness;
atma-vinigrahah — self-control.

Humility, modesty, non-violence, forgiveness, uprightness (morality), service
of the teacher, purity, resoluteness, self-control, (13.07)

indriyarthesu vairagyam anahankara eva ca
janma-mrtyu-jara-vyadhi- duhkha-dosanudarshanam (13.08)

indriya-arthesu - things of sense; vairagyam — dispassion; anahankarah -
absence of egoism; eva — even; ca — and; janma — of birth; mrtyu — death; jara
— old age; vyadhi — sickness, disease; duhkha - and pain; dosa - (of) evil;
anudarshanam - insight, perception; janma-mrtyu-jara-vyadhi-duhkha-
dosanudarshanam — insight of evil into birth, death, old age, disease and pain.

s

Dispassion towards the things of sense, and also absence of egoism, insight
of evil into birth, death, old age, disease and pain; (13.08)

asaktir anabhisvangah putra-dara-grhadisu
nityam ca sama-cittatvam istanistopapattisu (13.09)

asaktih - detachment, non-attachment; anabhisvangah - absence of
identification of self; putra — for son; dara — wife; grha-adisu - home and such
things.; nityam — constant; ca — and; sama-cittatvam - equal-mindedness; ista -
the pleasing, the desirable; anista - and the unpleasing, and the undesirable;
upapattisu - in whatever happens, on the attainment; istanistopapattisu - on the
attainment of the pleasing and the unpleasing.

Detachment, absence of identification of self with son, wife, home and such
things, and a constant equal-mindedness in whatever happens, pleasing and
unpleasing; (13.09)

mayi cananya-yogena bhaktir avyabhicarini
vivikta-desa-sevitvam aratir jana-samsadi (13.10)

mayi — to Me; ca — and; ananya-yogena - in yoga of union, by the yoga of non-
separation; bhaktih — devotion; avyabhicarini — unswerving; vivikta — to
solitary; desa — places; sevitvam - resorting, dwelling; aratih - taking no
pleasure, being without attachment, distaste; jana-samsadi - in the company of
worldly people, for the society of men.

Unswerving, concentrated, disciplined devotion to Me in yoga of union,
dwelling apart in solitary places, taking no pleasure in the company of
worldly people; (13.10)

adhyatma-jnana-nityatvam tattva-jnanartha-darshanam
etajjnanam iti proktam ajnanam yad ato 'nyatha (13.11)

adhyatma - concerning the self; jnana — in knowledge; nityatvam — constancy;
adhyatma-jnana-nityatvam - permanence in the knowledge of the Self; tattva-
jnana artha darshanam - perception of the goal of true knowledge; etat — this;
jnanam — knowledge; iti — thus; proktam — declared; ajnanam — ignorance; yat

— which; atah — from this; anyatha - opposed, other, all else.

Permanence in the knowledge of the Self (adhyatma; see also 7.29),
perception of the goal of true knowledge, all this is declared to be
knowledge, all else is ignorance. (13.11)

BRAHMAN THE KNOW ABLE BEYOND SPEECH AND THOUGHT

jneyam yat tat pravaksyami yaj jnatvamrtam asnute
anadi mat-param brahma na sat tan nasad ucyate (13.12)

jneyam - what is to be known, the knowable; yat — which; tat — that;
pravaksyami - (I) will describe, shall now explain; yat — which; jnatva —
knowing; amrtam — immortality; asnute - (one) attains; anadi mat - the
beginningless; param — supreme; brahma — Brahman; na - not, neither; sat —
being; tat — that; na - not, nor; asat - non-being; ucyate - is called, is said to be,
which is neither.

What is to be known I will describe to you, by knowing which one attains
immortality: the beginningless Supreme Being (Para-Brahma), which is
neither 'sat' (being) nor 'asat' (non-being) (lies beyond the cause and effect)',
(See also 9.19, 11.37, and 15.18) (13.12)

BRAHMAN IS THE SOURCE OF EVERYTHING

sarvatah pani-padam tat sarvato 'ksi-siro-mukham
sarvatah srutimal loke sarvam avrtya tisthati (13.13)

sarvatah — everywhere; pani - with hands; padam - and feet; tat — that;
sarvatah — everywhere; aksi - with eyes; sir ah — heads; mukham — mouths;
sarvatah — everywhere; sruti-mat - with ears; loke — in the world; sarvam — all;
avrtya - having developed; tisthati — exists.

With hands and feet on every side, with eyes, heads, mouths and ears on
every side, He (That) abides in the world, enveloping all. (See also RV

BRAHMAN IS UNCONDITIONED

sarvendriya-gunabhasam sarvendriya-vivarjitam
asaktam sarva-bhrc caiva nirgunam guna-bhoktr ca (13.14)

sarva indriya guna abhasam - shedding light by the functions of all the senses,
shedding light on all the constituents; sarva — of all; indriya — senses; guna — of
the constituents; abhasam - the light shining, the shined light \sarva — all;
indriya — senses; vivarjitam — being without; asaktam — unattachment; sarva-
bhrt - supporting everything; ca — and; eva — even; nirgunam - free from
constituents; guna-bhoktr — experiencer of the constituents (gunas); ca — and.

Devoid of all the senses, He, yet, sheds light on all their constituents (Gunas,
the three modes of Matter or Nature)', unattached, and yet supporting
everything; free from constituents (Gunas, the three modes of Matter or
Nature), yet, experiencing them. (13.14)

BRAHMAN IS ALL

bahir antas ca bhutanam acaram caram eva ca
suksmatvat tad avijneyam dura-stham cantike ca tat (13.15)

bahih - outside, without,; antah - within, inside; ca — and; bhutanam — of all
beings; acaram — immoving; caram — movable; eva — also; ca — and;
suksmatvat — on account of being subtle, by reason of its subtely; tat — that;
avijneyam — unknowable; dura-stham — far away; ca — and; antike — near; ca —
and; tat — that.

Within all beings, and yet outside them; immovable and also movable; by
reason of His subtlety, He (That, tat) is incapable of being known; far away
He (That, tat) stands near. (13.15)

BRAHMAN IS THE ONE 'SELF' (HIGHER SELF) IN ALL

avibhaktam ca bhutesu vibhaktam iva ca sthitam
bhuta-bhartr ca tajjneyam grasisnu prabhavisnu ca (13.16)

avibhaktam - undevided, without division; ca — and; bhutesu — in beings;
vibhaktam — divided; iva — as if; ca — and; sthitam - abiding, existing, situated;
bhuta-bhartr - the upholder of beings; ca — and; tat — that; jneyam - that which
should be known; grasisnu — devouring; prabhavisnu — generating; ca — and.

Undivided, in beings He (That, tat) abides seeming divided: This is 'That'
(tat) which should be known as the One who upholds, devours and
generates all beings. (See also 11.13, and 18.20) (13.16)

BRAHMA IS THE LIGHT THAT SHINES ON ALL

jyotisam api tajjyotis tamasah param ucyate
jnanam jneyam jnana-gamyam hrdi sarvasya visthitam (13.17)

jyotisam - of lights, in all luminous objects; api — even; tat — that; jyotih —
light; tamasah — from darkness; param — beyond; ucyate — is said; jnanam —
knowledge; jneyam - that which can be known; jnana-gamyam - the object of
knowledge; hrdi — in the heart; sarvasya — of all; visthitam - seated, situated.

That (tat), the Light of all lights is said to be 'Beyond darkness';
Knowledge, the object of knowledge, and that which can be known only
through knowledge, seated in the hearts of all. (See also 15.06 and 15.12,
and MuU 3.01.07, ShU 3.08) (13.17)

THROUGH DEVOTION THE LIGHT IS REVEALED, BHAKTI

EVOLVING IN JUANA

iti ksetram tatha jnanam jneyam coktam samasatah
mad-bhakta etad vijnaya mad-bhavayopapdyate (13.18)

iti — thus; ksetram — the field (the body); tatha - as well as,also; jnanam —
knowledge; jneyam — the knowable; ca — and; uktam - have been explained,
described; samasatah - briefly, in summary; mat-bhaktah — My devotee; etat —
this; vijnaya — knowing; mat-bhavaya — to My being; upapadyate — enters.

So, the 'Field' (ksetra, the body), 'Knowledge' and the 'Object of
Knowledge', have been briefly explained. My devotee, knowing this, enters
into My Being. (13.18)

PRAKRITI (MATTER, NATURE) AND PURUSHA (SELF, ATMA, SPIRIT)

ARE ETERNAL VALUES

prakrtim purusam caiva viddhy anadi ubhav api
vikarams ca gunams caiva viddhi prakrti-sambhavan (13.19)

prakrtim — Prakriti (matter, nature); purusam — Purusha; ca — and; eva - even;
viddhi — know; anadi - without commencement, without beginning; ubhau —
both; api — also; vikaran - changes, modifications, associations,
transformations; ca — and; gunan - constituents, gunas, the three modes of
nature; ca — and; eva — even; viddhi — know; prakrti - Prakriti, material nature;
sambhavan - arise from, born of, produced of.

Know that Prakriti (matter, nature) and Purusha (Self, Atma, Spirit) are both
without commencement; and know also that changes (modifications,
associations, transformations) and constituents (Gunas, the three modes of
Matter or Nature) arise from Prakriti (matter, nature). (13.19)

karya-karana-kartrtve hetuh prakrtir ucyate
purusah sukha-duhkhanam bhoktrtve hetur ucyate (13.20)

karya-karana-kartrtve — of the production of the body and the senses ; hetuh —
the cause; prakrtih — Prakriti (matter, nature) ; ucyate — is said (to be); purusah
— Purusha; sukha — of pleasure; duhkhanam — and pain; bhoktrtve - in the
experience; hetuh — the cause; ucyate — is said to be.

Prakriti (matter, nature) is said to be the source cause, of the production of
the body and the senses (effect and instruments). Purusha (Self, Atmd, Spirit)
is said to be the cause, in the experience of pleasures and pains. (13.20)

THE RESULT OF MUNDANE LIFE

purusah prakrti-stho hi bhunkte prakrti-jan gunan
karanam guna-sango 'sya sad-asad-yoni-janmasu (13.21)

purusah — Purusha; prakrti-sthah - positioned in Prakriti; hi - indeed, certainly;
bhunkte - experiencing, enjoys; prakrti-jan - born of Prakriti; gunan -
constituents, gunas, the modes of nature; karanam — the cause; guna-sangah -
attachment to the consituents; asya — of his; sat-asat — in good and bad; yoni —
wombs; janmasu - of births.

For this Purusha (Self, Atmd, Spirit) is positioned in Prakriti (matter, nature),
experiencing its 'constituents' born of Prakriti. Attachment to the
constituents (Gunas, the three modes of Matter or Nature) is instrumental in
taking birth in good and bad wombs. (13.21)

BRAHMA-JNANA CHASES AWAY THE DELUSION OF BIRTH

upadrastanumanta ca bharta bhokta mahesvarah
paramatmeti capy ukto dehe 'smin purusah parah (13.22)

upadrasta - surveyor, spectator, overseer; anumanta - approver, permitter; ca —
and; bharta - supporter; bhokta - experiencer, enjoyer; maha-isvarah — the
Great Lord; parama-atma — the Supreme Self; iti — also; ca — and; api — also;
uktah — is called; dehe — in the body; asmin - (in) this; purusah — Purusha;
parah — Supreme.

The Supreme Purusha (Transcendental Enjoyer), here in the body, is also
called the Surveyor, the Approver, the Supporter, the One who experiences,
the Great Lord and the Supreme Self. (13.22)

ya evam vetti purusam prakrtim ca gunaih saha
sarvatha vartamano 'pi na sa bhuyo 'bhijayate (13.23)

yah — who; evam — thus; vetti — knows; purusam — Purusha; prakrtim —
Prakriti; ca — and; gunaih - constituents, gunas, the modes of material nature;
saha — with; sarvatha — in all ways; vartamanah - may be found (living); api —
also; na - not, never; sah — he; bhuyah — again; abhijayate — takes his birth, is
born (enter into rebirth).

He who in this way knows the Purusha (Self, Atma, Spirit) and Prakriti
(matter, nature) with its constituents (Gunas, the three modes of Matter or
Nature), in whatever condition he may be, does not enter into rebirth.
(13.23)

THE FOUR PATHS TO SELF-KNOWLEDGE

dhyanenatmani pasyanti kecid atmanam atmana
anye sankhyena yogena karma-yogena capare (13.24)

dhyanena — by meditation; atmani — within the self; pasyanti — see; kecit —
some; atmanam — the Self; atmana — by the self; anye — others; sankhyena - by
Sankhya, of philosophical discussion; yogena — by the yoga system; karma-
yogena — by Karma- Yoga; ca — and; apare — others.

Through meditation some see the Self in the self by the Self; others by
Sankhya Yoga (yoga of knowledge), and still others by Karma- Yoga (actions
without fruitive desires). (13.24)

anye tv evam ajanantah srutvanyebhya upasate
te 'pi catitaranty eva mrtyum sruti-parayanah (13.25)

anye — others; tu — indeed; evam — thus; ajanantah - not conversant, without
knowledge; srutva - having heard; anyebhyah — from others; upasate —
worship; te — they; api — also; ca — and; atitaranti - pass beyond, cross beyond,
transcending; eva — even; mrtyum — death; sruti-parayanah - taking their stand
on what they have heard, inclined to the process of hearing.

In addition, others, not conversant in these (spiritual or yoga of knowledge),
worship as they have heard from others; and even them taking their stand
on what they have heard (taking their stand on Scriptures), pass also beyond
death. (13.25)

NOTHING EXISTS OUTSIDE THE SELF

yavat sanjayate kincit sattvam sthavara-jangamam
ksetra-ksetrajna-samyogat tad viddhi bharatarsabha (13.26)

yavat — whatever; sanjayate — comes to be; kincit — any; sattvam — being;
sthavara — unmoving; jangamam — moving; ksetra — of the field; ksetra-jna —
and the knower of the field; samyogat — by the union of, between; tat - that;
viddhi — know; bharata-rsabha — O best of the Bharatas, Arjuna.

Whatever being comes to be, moving or unmoving, O best of the Bharata
(Arjuna), know this, derives its being from the union of the 'Field' (ksetra)
and the 'Knower of the Field' (ksetrajna). (See also 7.06) (13.26)

THE ONE SELF IN ALL

samam sarvesu bhutesu tisthantam paramesvaram
vinasyatsv avinasyantam yah pasyati sa pasyati (13.27)

samam — equally; sarvesu - (in) all; bhutesu - in beings, in contingent beings;
tisthantam - abiding, residing; parama-isvaram — the Supreme Lord; vinasyatsu
- among the mortal, among the perishing, in the destructible; avinasyantam -
among the immortal, the unperishing; yah — who; pasyati — sees; sah — he;
pasyati — indeed sees.

He who sees the Supreme Lord abiding ever the same in all contingent
beings, immortal in the mortal, he indeed sees. (13.27)

KNOWLEDGE OF THE ONE SELF LEADS TO LIBERATION

samam pasyan hi sarvatra samavasthitam isvaram
na hinasty atmanatmanam tato yati param gatim (13.28)

samam — equally; pasyan — seeing; hi — certainly; sarvatra — everywhere;
samavasthitam — equally established, situated; isvaram — the Lord; na — not;
hinasti — destroy; atmana — by the self; atmanam — the self; tatah — then; yati -
treads, goes, reaches ; param — the highest; gatim - destination, path, goal.

Perceiving, indeed, the same Lord as equally established everywhere, he
does not destroy the Self (true Self, Higher Self) by the self (self-sense), and in
this way, he treads the highest Path (Goal). (13.28)

NOT THE 'SELF' BUT PRAKRITI ACTS

prakrtyaiva ca karmani kriyamanani sarvasah
yah pasyati tathatmanam akartaram sa pasyati (13.29)

prakrtya — by Prakriti; eva — alone; ca — and; karmani — actions; kriyamanani -
- being performed; sarvasah — all; yah — who; pasyati — sees; tatha — also;
atmanam - the self; akartaram — the no doer, actionless, not in action; sah — he;
pasyati — sees indeed.

He who perceives that Prakriti (matter, nature) performs all actions, and
that the Self (Atmd) engages not in actions, he sees indeed. (See also 3.27,

THE SELF IS THE SOURCE AND THE ABODE OF ALL CONTINGENT

BEINGS

yada bhuta-prthag-bhavam eka-stham anupasyati
tata eva ca vistaram brahma sampadyate tada (13.30)

yada — when; bhuta — of contingent beings; prthak-bhavam - the diversity; eka-
stham - abiding, resting in one; anupasyati - sees, perceives; tatah - from that;
eva — alone; ca — and; vistaram — the expansion, the spreading, the radiation;
brahma — Brahman; sampadyate - (he) reaches, attains; tada — then.

When one perceives that, the diversity of contingent beings abides in One,
and from "That" (tat) only they radiate, then he reaches the Brahman.
(13.30)

THE 'SELF' IS NOT AFFECTED BY THE FRUITS OF ACTION

anaditvan nirgunatvat paramatmayam avyayah
sarira-stho 'pi Kaunteya na karoti na lipyate (13.31)

anaditvat - being without beginning, knowing no beginning; nirgunatvat - no
constituent of matter, being devoid of Gunas; parama atma - the Supreme Self;
ayam — this; avyayah — imperishable; sarira-sthah - dwelling, seated in the
body; api — though; kaunteya -O Kaunteya, O son of Kunti, Arjuna; na - not;
karoti — acts; na lipyate - nor is affected, nor is tainted, nor is he entangled.

Because this Supreme Self, imperishable, knows no beginning, no
constituent of Matter (of Nature; Gunas, the three modes of matter), though
seated in the body, O son of Kunti (Arjuna), neither acts, nor is affected in
any way. (13.31)

yatha sarva-gatam sauksmyad akasam nopalipyate
sarvatravasthito dehe tathatma nopalipyate (13.32)

yatha — as; sarva-gatam - the all-pervading; sauksmyat - on account of its
subtlety, due to being subtle; akasam — ether; na - not, never; upalipyate -
(knowing no) defilement, (is not) tainted, ; sarvatra — everywhere; avasthitah -
abiding, situated; dehe — in the body; tatha — so; atma — the Self; na - not,
never; upalipyate - (knowing no) defilement.

Just as the ether (akasa), pervading everything, knows no defilement on
account of its subtlety, so does the Self, though everywhere abiding and
embodied, know no defilement. (13.32)

THE 'SELF' ILLUMINES ALL

yatha prakasayaty ekah krtsnam lokam imam ravih
ksetram ksetri tatha krtsnam prakasayati Bharata (13.33)

yatha — as; prakasayati - lights, illuminates; ekah — one; krtsnam — the whole;
lokam — universe; imam — this; ravih — sun; ksetram — this field; ksetri — the
knower of the field, the Lord of the field; tatha — so; krtsnam - all, entire,
whole; prakasayati — illumine; bharata — O son of Bharata, Arjuna.

Just as the one Sun lights up this entire universe, so does the 'Knower of the
Field' (ksetrajna) illumine this entire 'Field' (ksetra), O Bharata (Arjuna).
(13.33)

THE TEACHING SUMMED UP

ksetra-ksetrajnayor evam antaram jnana-caksusa
bhuta-prakrti-moksam ca ye vidur yanti te param (13.34)

ksetra — of the field; ksetra-jnayoh — of the knower of the field; evam — thus;
antaram — the difference; jnana-caksusa — by the eyes of knowledge; bhuta —
of beings; prakrti — from Prakriti; moksam - the deliverance, the liberation; ca -
- and; ye — who; viduh — know; yanti - attain, go, approach; te — they; param —
the Supreme.

They who by the eyes of knowledge discern the difference between the
'Field' (ksetra) and the 'Knower of the Field' (ksetrajna), and the
deliverance of beings from Prakriti (Matter, the material form), they attain
the Supreme. (13.34)

In the Upanisad of the Bhagavadglta, the knowledge of Brahman the

Supreme, the science of yoga, and the dialogue between Srlkrsna and

Arjuna, this is the thirteenth discourse entitled, "The Field and the Knower

(Matter and Spirit)".


Fourteenth Discourse



The Three Gunas of Nature

KNOWLEDGE OF THE ORIGIN OF CREATION IS BASIC FOR

SALVATION



sri-bhagavan uvaca
param bhuyah pravaksyami jnananam jnanam uttamam
yaj jnatva munayah sarve param siddhimn ito gatah (14.01)

sri-bhagavan uvaca — the Supreme Lord said; param — supreme; bhuyah —
again; pravaksyami - (I) will speak, declare, proclaim; jnananam — of all
knowledges; jnanam — knowledge; uttamam — the best; yat — which; jnatva -
knowing known, knowing (this); munayah — the sages; sarve — all; param —
supreme; siddhim - to perfection; itah — from this world; gatah - gone to,
(attained).

The Supreme Lord said: Once again I will proclaim the supreme
knowledge, the best of all knowledges (jnana, doctrine, metaphysical or
spiritual knowledge), on knowing this, all Sages (Munis) have from this world
gone to the supreme Perfection. (14.01)

idam jnanam upasritya mama sadharmyam agatah
sarge 'pi nopajayante pralaye na vyathanti ca (14.02)

idam — this; jnanam — knowledge; upasritya - as their refuge, having taken
refuge, taking shelter of; mama — My; sadharmyam — same nature, My own
nature; agatah — having attained, having reached; sarge api - also at the time of
creation; na - not, never; upajayante — are born; pralaye -at the time of
dissolution, in the annihilation; na - not, nor; vyathanti — are disturbed, are
failing (nor do they fail); ca — and.

With this knowledge as their refuge, they reached an order of existence
equivalent to (sddharmya) My own nature, and are not reborn at the time of
creation, nor do they fail at the time of dissolution. (14.02)

EVOLUTION OF CREATION FROM THE UNION OF SPIRIT AND MATTER

mama yonir mahad brahma tasmin garbham dadhamy aham
sam bhavah sarva-bhutanam tato bhavati bharata (14.03)

mama — My; yonih — womb; mahat - great ; brahma - (the great) Brahma;
tasmin — in that; garbham - seed, germ; dadhami — plant; aham — I; sambhavah
- the birth, the origin; sarva-bhutanam — of all contingent beings; tatah - from
this; bhavati - becomes, derives; bharata — O son of Bharata, Arjuna.

My womb is the Great Brahman (Mahat Brahma), O Bharata (Arjuna), in it
I plant the seed: from this derives the origin of all contingent beings. (See
also 9.10) (14.03)

sarva-yonisu Kaunteya murtayah sambhavanti yah
tasam brahma mahad yonir aham bija-pradah pita (14.04)

sarva-yonisu — in whatever wombs; kaunteya - O Kaunteya, O son of Kunti,
Arjuna; murtayah — forms; sambhavanti — they appear, being taken form; yah —
which; tasam — their; brahma — Brahma; mahat - great; yonih — womb; aham -
- 1; bija-pradah — the seed-giving ; pita — father.

In whatever wombs beings take form, O son of Kunti (Arjuna), the Great
Brahman (Mahat Brahma) is their womb, and I the Father, giver of the seed
(or, life-giving). (14.04)

THE CONTINGENTS (GUNAS) BIND THE SOUL

sattvam rajas tama iti gunah prakrti-sambhavah
nibadhnanti maha-baho dehe dehinam avyayam (14.05)

sattvam - Sattva, the mode of goodness; rajah - Rajas, the mode of passion;
tamah - Tamas, the mode of ignorance; iti - these; gunah - the constituents,
Gunas, the qualities; prakrti - Prakriti, material nature; sambhavah - born of;
nibadhnanti - bind; maha-baho - O mighty-armed, Arjuna; dehe - in the body;
dehinam - the embodied; avyayam - indestructible (sojourner).

Sattva (goodness), Rajas (passion, activity), Tamas (ignorance, darkness,
inertia)', these are the 'constituents' (Gunas of Nature) Matter-born (born of
Prakriti). They bind the embodied soul, O mighty-armed (Arjuna), though
the indestructible sojourner (the soul) in the body. (14.05)

THE NATURE AND FUNCTION OF THE GUNAS

tatra sattvam nirmalatvat prakasakam anamayam
sukha-sangena badhnati jnana-sangena canagha (14.06)

tatra - of these; sattvam - Sattva, the mode of goodness; nirmalatvat — being
stainless; prakasakam - dispensing light, luminous, illuminating; anamayam -
knowing no sickness; sukha — with happiness; sangena — by attachment;
badhnati — binds; jnana — with knowledge; sangena — by attachment; ca — and;
anagha — O sinless one.

Of these, Sattva (goodness), being stainless, knowing no sickness, dispensing
light, O sinless one (Arjuna), binds by attachment to happiness (sukha, joy,
bliss) and by attachment to knowledge. (14.06)

rajo ragatmakam viddhi trsna-sanga-samudbhavam
tan nibadhnati Kaunteya karma-sangena dehinam (14.07)

rajah - rajas, the mode of passion; raga-atmakam - instinct with desire, born of
desire or lust, of the nature of passion; viddhi — know; trsna - welling up, with
hankering; sanga - source; samudbhavam - welling up, produced of ; trsna-
sanga-samudbhavam — the source of longing and attachment; tat — that;
nibadhnati — binds; kaunteya - O Kaunteya, O son of Kunti, Arjuna; karma-
sangena — by attachment to action; dehinam — the embodied.

Know, O son of Kunti (Arjuna), that Rajas (passion) is instinct with desire,
welling up through longing and attachment, binding the embodied soul by
the attachment to action. (14.07)

tamas tv ajnana-jam viddhi mohanam sarva-dehinam
pramadalasya-nidrabhis tan nibadhnati bharata (14.08)

tamah -Tamas, inertia, the mode of ignorance; tu — but; ajnana-jam — born of
ignorance; viddhi — know; mohanam - leading astray, deluding; sarva-dehinam
— of all embodied beings (souls, men being living souls); pramada —
heedlessness; pramadalasya-nidrabhih - by heedlessness, indolence and sleep;
alasya — indolence; nidrabhih — and sleep; tat — that; nibadhnati - binds fast;
bharata — O Bharata, Arjuna.

Tamas (ignorance, darkness, inertia) is born of ignorance: know this well. It
leads astray all embodied souls, O Bharata (Arjuna), binding fast by
heedlessness, indolence, and sleep. (14.08)

sattvam sukhe sanjayati rajah karmani bharata
jnanam avrtya tu tamah pramade sanjayaty uta (14.09)

sattvam - Sattva, the mode of goodness; sukhe — to happiness; sanjayati - to
cling, to attach; rajah - Rajas, the mode of passion; karmani - to action; bharata
- O Bharata, Arjuna; jnanam — knowledge; avrtya - shrouding, stifling,
covering; tu — but; tamah - Tamas, the mode of ignorance; pramade - to
heedlessness; sanjayati — binds; uta — but.

Sattva (goodness) causes one to cling to happiness, Rajas (passion) to action,
O Bharata (Arjuna), but Tamas (ignorance, inertia, darkness) stifling
knowledge, binds one to heedlessness. (14.09)

THE JOINT ACTION OF THE GUNAS

rajas tamas cabhibhuya sattvam bhavati bharata
rajah sattvam tamas caiva tamah sattvam rajas tatha (14.10)

rajah - Rajas, the mode of passion; tamah - Tamas, the mode of ignorance; ca -
- and; abhibhuya - having dominated, having overpowered, surpassing; sattvam
- Sattva, the mode of goodness; bhavati - prevailing, becomes prominent;
bharata — O Bharata, Arjuna; rajah - Rajas, the mode of passion; sattvam -
Sattva, the mode of goodness; tamah - Tamas, the mode of ignorance; ca — and;
eva — even; tamah - Tamas, the mode of ignorance; sattvam - Sattva, the mode
of goodness; rajah -Rajas, the mode of passion; tatha — also.

Sattva (goodness) prevails, having dominated Rajas (passion) and Tamas
(ignorance, inertia, darkness), O Bharata (Arjuna), and Rajas (passion) over
Sattva (goodness) and Tamas (ignorance, inertia, darkness); and Tamas
(ignorance, inertia, darkness) over Sattva (goodness) and Rajas (passion).
(14.10)

WHEN A PARTICULAR GUN IS PREDOMINANT

sarva-dvaresu dehe 'smin prakasa upajayate
jnanam yada tada vidyad vivrddham sattvam ity uta (14.11)

sarva-dvaresu - through all the gates; dehe asmin — in this body; prakasah
knowledge's light, wisdom-light; upajayate -arises, develops; jnanam ■
knowledge; yada — when; tada - then, at that time; vidyat — know; vivrddham
is predominant; sattvam - Sattva, the mode of goodness; iti — so; uta — indeed.

When through all the gates (senses) of the body, knowledge's light arises,
then you must know that Sattva (goodness) is predominant. (14.11)

lobhah pravrttir arambhah karmanam asamah sprha
rajasy etanijayante vivrddhe bharatarsabha (14.12)

lobhah — greed; pravrttih — activity; arambhah - urge, the undertaking,
endeavour; karmanam - for action; asamah - disquiet, restlessness; sprha -
ambition, longing, desire; raj as i - Rajas, of the mode of passion; etani — these;
jay ante - arise, develop; vivrddhe - waxing strong, having become predominant;
bharata-rsabha — O best of the Bharatas, Arjuna.

When Rajas (passion) is waxing strong, arise greed (avarice), the urge for
action, commitment of oneself to action, disquiet and ambition, O best of
the Bharatas (Arjuna) (14.12)

aprakaso 'pravrttis ca pramado moha eva ca
tamasy etanijayante vivrddhe kuru-nandana (14.13)

aprakasah — darkness; apravrttih - inertness, inactivity; ca — and; pramadah —
heedlessness; mohah — delusion; eva — even; ca — and; tamasi — inertia; etani —
these; jayante — arise; vivrddhe - (have become) is predominant; kuru-nandana
— O descendant of the Kurus, Arjuna.

Tamas (ignorance, inertia, darkness) constituent is predominant, when
darkness, inertia, heedlessness, and delusion arise, O descendent of the
Kurus (Arjuna). (14.13)

BEHIND THE VEIL OF MORTALITY AS GOVERNED BY THE GUNAS

yada sattve pravrddhe tu pralayam yati deha-bhrt
tadottama-vidam lokan amalan pratipadyate (14.14)

yada — when; sattve - Sattva, the mode of goodness; pravrddhe - (having
become) predominant; tu - surely, but; pralayam - dissolution, death; yati -
comes, goes; deha-bhrt — the embodied soul (one) (man is a living soul); tada -
then, at that time; uttama-vidam - of those who know the Highest, of the great
sages; lokan — the worlds; amalan - pure, spotless; pratipadyate - reaches,
attains.

However, when the embodied soul comes to face the body's dissolution
(death), while Sattva (goodness) is predominant, then he reaches the spotless
worlds of those who know the Highest. (14.14)

rajasi pralayam gatva karma-sangisu jayate
tatha pralinas tamasi mudha-yonisu jayate (14.15)

rajasi - in rajas, in passion; pralayam - dissolution, death; gatva - coming to,
meeting, attaining; karma-sangisu - among those attached to action; jayate - he
is born (will be born), takes birth; tatha — so; pralinah — being dissolved, dying;
tamasi - in tamas, in inertia, in ignorance; mudha-yonisu — in the womb of the
senseless, in the womb of the ignorant species; jayate - he is born, will be born,
takes birth.

Coming to dissolution (to die) when Rajas (passion) predominates, he will be
born among those attached to action; if dissolved (if dying) in Tamas
(ignorance, inertia, darkness), he will be born in the womb of the ignorant
species (the senseless, the foolish). (14.15)

karmanah sukrtasyahuh sattvikam nirmalam phalam
rajasas tu phalam duhkham ajnanam tamasah phalam (14.16)

karmanah — of action; su-krtasya - of good; ahuh — is said; sattvikam -
Sattvika, in the mode of goodness; nirmalam - pure, spotless; phalam — the
fruit; rajasah - of Rajas, of the mode of passion; tu - but (while); phalam — the
fruit; duhkham — pain; ajnanam — ignorance; tamasah - of inertia, of the mode
of ignorance; phalam — the fruit.

It is said that the fruit of good actions is Sattvika (good, beneficial, pious)
and spotless; while the fruit of Rajas (passion) is pain; and, foolishness is the
fruit of Tamas (ignorance, inertia, darkness). (14.16)

SUMMARY OF THE FUNCTIONS OF THE GUNAS

sattvat sanjayate jnanam rajaso lobha eva ca
pramada-mohau tamaso bhavato 'jnanam eva ca (14.17)

sattvat - from Sattva, from the mode of goodness; sanjayate - comes, arises,
develops; jnanam — knowledge; rajasah - from Rajas, from the mode of
passion; lobhah — greed; eva — even; ca — and; pramada — heedlessness;
mohau — and delusion; tamasah - from Tamas, from the mode of ignorance;
bhavatah - comes, arises, develop; ajnanam — ignorance; eva — even; ca — and.

From Sattva (goodness) comes knowledge, from Rajas (passion) greed; and
from Tamas (ignorance, inertia, darkness) error and also ignorance. (14.17)

urdhvam gacchanti sattva-stha madhye tisthanti rajasah
jaghanya-guna-vrtti stha adho gacchanti tamasah (14.18)

urdhvam - the higher, upwards; gacchanti — go; sattva-sthah - abiding in
Sattva, in Sattva seated, those situated in the mode of goodness; madhye — in the
middle; tisthanti — dwell; rajasah -the Rajasika, the Rajasic, those situated in
the mode of passion; jaghanya - (in the modes of) the lower (spheres); guna -
Gunas, quality; vrtti-sthah — abiding; jaghanya-guna-vrtti sthah - abiding in the
role of the lowest Guna, in the modes of the lower spheres; adhah — down;
gacchanti — go; tamasah - in Tamasika, the Tamasic, persons in the mode of
ignorance.

The higher spheres are for those who abide in Sattva (goodness), in the
middle stand the Rajasic (the passionate)', stuck in the modes of the lower
spheres, the Tamasic (the ignorant). (14.18)

nanyam gunebhyah kartaram yada drastanupasyati
gunebhyas ca param vetti mad-bhavam so 'dhigacchati (14.19)

na — not; anyam — other; gunebhyah - than the constituents, than the Gunas,
than the qualities; kartaram - agent, performer; yada — when; drasta - the seer;
anupasyati - perceives, sees properly; gunebhyah - than the constituents, than
the qualities, to the modes of nature; ca — and; param — higher; vetti — knows;
mat-bhavam — to My nature; sah — he; adhigacchati - enters, attains to.

When the seer perceives that there is no agent other than the constituents
(Gunas) and knows Him, the Supreme, who is beyond them (the Gunas), he
enters into My Nature. (See also 3.27, 5.09, and 13.29) (14.19)

gunan etan atitya trin dehi deha-samudbhavan
janma-mrtyu jara-duhkhair vimukto 'mrtam asnute (14.20)

gunan - constituents, Gunas, qualities; etan — these; atitya — transcending; trin -
- three; dehi — the embodied; deha — the body; samudbhavan - out of which,
arising from, produced of; janma - from birth; mrtyu — death; jara — and old
age; duhkhaih — pain; vimuktah — being is liberated, freed from; amrtam —
immortality; asnute — attains.

Transcending these three constituents (Gunas), arising from the body's
existence; the embodied soul is liberated from birth, death, old age, and
pain, and attains immortality. (14.20)

THE BEHAVE OF THE LIBERATED ONES

arjuna uvaca
kair lingais trin gunan etan atito bhavati prabho
kim acarah katham caitams trin gunan ativartate (14.21)

arjunah uvaca — Arjuna said; kaih — what; lingaih - the marks; trin — three;
gunan - Gunas, constituents, qualities; etan — these; atitah — having
transcended; bhavati — is; prabho — O Lord; kim — what; acarah — behaviour;
katham — how; ca — and; eto« — these; fri« — three; gunan - Gunas,
constituents, qualities; ativartate - stepping out beyond.

Arjuna said: What are the marks of him who has transcended the three
constituents (Gunas), O Lord? How does he behave? And, how does he step
out beyond these three constituents? (14.21)

sri-bhagavan uvaca
prakasam ca pravrttim ca moham eva ca pandava
na dvesti sampravrttani na nivrttani kanksati (14.22)

sri-bhagavan uvaca — the Supreme Lord said; prakasam - radiance,
illumination, light; ca — and; pravrttim — activity; ca — and; moham — delusion;
eva ca - (and) even; pandava — O son of Pandu, O Pandava, Arjuna; na — not;
dvesti - does (not)hate; sampravrttani - when they arise; na - not; nivrttani -
when absent; kanksati - longs, desires.

The Supreme Lord said: He, O Pandava (Arjuna), who hates not radiance,
nor activity, nor even delusion when they arise, nor longs after them when
absent; (14.22)

udasina-vad asino gunair yo na vicalyate
guna vartanta ity evam yo 'vatisthati nengate (14.23)

udasina-vat - indifferent, as if neutral, like one unconcerned; asinah - seated,
situated; gunaih - by the Gunas, by the constituents, by the qualities; yah —
who; na - not, never; vicalyate - is moved, is agitated; gunah - the Gunas, the
constituents, the qualities; vartante — are acting, operate, are busy; iti evam —
knowing so; yah — who; avatisthati - is firm-based, is self-centred; na - not,
never; ingate - (un) wavering, flickers.

He who sits indifferent, unruffled by the constituents (Gunas); who,
thinking that the constituents (Gunas) are busy, is firm-based and
unwavering; (14.23)

sama-duhkha-sukhah sva-sthah sama-lostasma-kancanah
tulya-priyapriyo dhiras tulya-nindatma-samstutih (14.24)

soma - alike, balanced, equal; duhkha — in pain; sukhah — and pleasure; sva-
sthah - dwelling in the Self; sama - alike, equally; losta — a lump of earth;
asma - a stone; kancanah — gold; tulya - are alike; priya — to the loved ones;
apriyah — and the unloved ones; dhirah - constant, firm, steady; tulya - the
same; ninda — in blame; atma-samstutih - and in praise.

Balanced in pleasure as in pain, who dwells in the Self, to whom a lump of
earth, a stone or gold are alike; the same to loved and unloved ones,
constant, the same in blame and in praise; (14.24)

manapamanayos tulyas tulyo mitrari-paksayoh
sarvarambha-parityagi gunatitah sa ucyate (14.25)

mana — in honour; apamanayoh — and dishonour; tulyah - the same, equal;
tuiyah - the same, equal; mitra ari paksayoh - to friend and enemy; sarva — all;
arambha - initiative, undertaking; parityagi - relinquishing, abandoning; guna-
atitah - transcending the constituents, the Gunas ; sah — he; ucyate — is said.

The same in honour and dishonour, the same to friend and enemy,
relinquishing all initiative for action - he is said to have transcended the
constituents (Gunas). (14.25)

THE YOGA OF DEVOTION LEADS TO LIBERATION

mam ca yo 'vyabhicarena bhakti-yogena sevate
sa gunan samatityaitan brahma-bhuyaya kalpate (14.26)

mam — Me; ca — and; yah — who; avyabhicarena - unswerving, without fail;
bhakti-yogena - (with) yoga of devotion; sevate - do honour, serves; sah — he;
gunan - constituents, Gunas, the modes of material nature; samatitya - passing
beyond; etan — these; brahma-bhuyaya - becoming Brahman; kalpate - is fit.

And, as to him who do Me honour with unswerving Yoga of devotion,
passes beyond the constituents (Gunas), fit for becoming Brahman.

brahmano hi pratisthaham amrtasyavyayasya ca
sasvatasya ca dharmasya sukhasyaikantikasya ca (14.27)

brahmanah — of Brahman; hi — indeed; pratistha - the final (seat); aham — I
am; amrtasya — the immortal; avyayasya — of the immutable; ca — and;
sasvatasya — of the eternal; ca — and; dharmasya — of dharma; sukhasya - of
beatitude, of bliss; aikantikasya — absolute; ca — and.

For I am the final seat of Brahman, the Immortal and the Immutable, the
Eternal Dharma (the eternal law of righteousness), and the absolute
beatitude (sukha). (14.27)

In the Upanisad of the Bhagavadglta, the knowledge of Brahman the
Supreme, the science of yoga, and the dialogue between Srlkrsna and
Arjuna, this is the fourteenth discourse entitled, "The Three Gunas of Nature".

Fifteenth Discourse

The Yoga of the Supreme Self

THE TREE OF LIFE

sri-bhagavan uvaca
urdhva-mulam adhah-sakham asvattham prahur avyayam
chandamsi yasya parnani yas tarn veda sa veda-vit (15.01)

sri-bhagavan uvaca — the Supreme Lord said; urdhva-mulam — with roots
above; adhah - beneath, downwards; sakham — branches; asvattham - the
Asvattha, banyan tree; prahuh — is said; avyayam — imperishable; chandamsi —
the Vedic hymns; yasya — of which; parnani — leaves; yah — who; tarn — that;
veda — knows; sah — he; vedavit- (is) Veda-knower, the knower of the Vedas.

The Supreme Lord said: With roots above and branches beneath, the
Asvattha (fig tree, banyan tree) is said to be imperishable; its leaves are the
Vedic hymns; he who knows it, knows the Vedas. (See also KaU 6.01, BP

adhas cordhvam prasrtas tasya sakha guna-pravrddha visaya-pravalah
adhas ca mulany anusantatani karmanubandhini manusya-loke (15.02)

adhah - below, downward; ca — and; urdhvam - above, upward; prasrtah —
spread; tasya — its; sakhah — branches; guna - constituents, Gunas, by the
modes of material nature; pravrddhah — nourished; visaya — sense objects;
pravalah — buds; adhah - below, downward; ca — and; mulani — roots;
anusantatani - are stretched forth, proliferated inseparably ; karma — action;
anubandhini — linked; manusya-loke — in the world of men.

Below and above are spread its branches, nourished by the constituents
(Gunas of nature, Qualities); sense-objects are its buds, and below its roots
proliferate inseparably linked with actions in the world of men. (15.02)

CUTTING THE TREE TO GET MORS A

na rupam asyeha tathopalabhyate nanto na cadir na ca sampratistha
asvattham enam su-virudha-mulam asanga-sastrena drdhena chittva
(15.03)






na — not; rupam — form; asya — its; z'/ia — here; tatha — also; upalabhyate — can
be perceived; na — not; ««ta/i — end; na — not; c« — and; adih - origin,
beginning; na — not; ca — and; sampratistha - existence, foundation; asvattham

- Asvattha, banyan tree; enam — this; su-virudha - strongly; mulam — rooted;
asanga-sastrena — by the sword of non-attachment; drdhena — strong; chittva -
been cut down.

No form of it can here be perceived, nor its end, nor its origin, nor its
existence. This strongly-rooted Asvattha (fig tree, banyan tree) having been
cut down by an unswerving sword of non-attachment; (15.03)

tatah padam tat parimargitavyam yasmin gata na nivartanti bhuyah

tarn eva cadyam purusam prapadye yatah pravrttih prasrta purani (15.04)

tatah — then; padam — goal; tat — that; parimargitavyam - should be sought;
yasmin — where; gatah - gone, having tread on; na — not; nivartanti — return;
bhuyah — again; tarn - in that; eva — even; ca — and; adyam — primeval;
purusam — Purusha; prapadye - I take refuge; yatah — from whom; pravrttih -
activity, process; prasrta - flowed forth; purani — ancient.

Then, 'That' (tat) Goal should be sought, to which, when having tread on,
there is no return (saying): I take refuge in that Primeval Purusha (Person,
Man, Principle) from whom flowed forth this ancient cosmic process

(pravrtti). (15.04)

THE PATH TO THE GOAL

nirmana-mohajita-sanga-dosa adhyatma-nitya vinivrtta-kamah
dvandvair vimuktah sukha-duhkha-samjnair gacchanty amudhah padam
avyayam tat (15.05)

nih - free, without; mana — pride; mohah — and ignorance; jita — victorious;
sanga — of attachment; dosah — the vice (evil); adhyatma - in the Self; nityah -
ever abiding, constantly; vinivrtta — suppressed; kamah — desire; dvandvaih —
from the pairs of opposites; vimuktah - released, freed, liberated; sukha-duhkha

— pleasure and pain; samjnaih — known; gacchanti - tread, reach, attain;
amudhah — undeluded; padam — goal; avyayam — eternal; tat — that.

Free from pride and ignorance, victorious over the vice of attachment, ever
abiding in what concerns the Self, desire suppressed, released from the
pairs of opposites (all dualities) made known in pleasure as in pain, they
tread, undeluded, that Eternal Goal (place, region). (15.05)






THE GOAL, THE LORD'S SUPREME ABODE

na tad bhasayate suryo na sasanko na pavakah

yad gatva na nivartante tad dhama paramam mama (15.06)

na — not; tat — that; bhasayate - illumines, lights; suryah — the sun; na — not;
sasankah — the moon; na — not; pavakah — fire; yat — where; gatva - going,
reaching; na — not; nivartante — they return; tat dhama — that abode; paramam -
- supreme; mama — My.

Nor does the sun lights there, nor moon, nor fire. That is My supreme
abode (dhama, home) from where, having reached it, no one returns. (See
also 13.17 and 15.12, and KaU 5.15, ShU 6.14, MuU 2.02.10) (15.06)

JIVA IS THE LORD 'S RAY

mamaivamso jiva-loke jiva-bhutah sanatanah
manah-sasthanindriyani prakrti sthani karsati (15.07)

mama — My; eva — even; amsah - portion, particle; jiva-loke — in the world of
life, live in the living world; jiva-bhutah - having become a soul, having
become an immortal Jiva; sanatanah — eternal; manah — with mind; sasthani -
as the six; indriyani — senses; prakrti — in Prakriti; sthani — abiding; karsati -
drawing to itself.

A portion (a minute particle, a ray) of Mine own Self, which becomes life in
the living world (the living world of Jivas) into an immortal Jiva (Jivatma,
Soul; a life, individualised from the Supreme (Eternal) Being), drawing to itself
the senses, with the mind as the sixth, abiding in Prakriti (matter). (15.07)

sariram yad avapnoti yac capy utkramatisvarah
grh itvaitani sam yati vayur gandhan ivasayat (15.08)

sariram - a body; yat — when; avapnoti - assumes, obtains, gets; yat — when; ca
api - and also; utkramati - abandons it, leaves it, gives up; isvarah — the lord;
grhitva — taking; etani — these; samyati — wafts away; vayuh — the wind;
gandhan — scents; iva — as; asayat — from their sources.

When the Lord assumes a body, and when He abandons it, He takes them
(the senses and the mind), moving on with them, just as the wind wafts away
the scents from their sources. (See also 2.13) (15.08)






srotram caksuh sparsanam ca rasanam ghranam eva ca
adhisthaya manas cayam visayan upasevate (15.09)

srotram - the ear; caksuh - the eye; sparsanam - the touch; ca — and; rasanam
- the taste (tongue); ghranam - the smell; eva — even; ca — and; adhisthaya -
moving among; manah - the mind; ca — and; ayam — he; visayan - the things of
sense; upasevate — enjoys.

Through the ear, the eye, the touch, the taste, and the smell, and likewise
the mind, He moves among the things of sense. (15.09)

THE SELF IS ONLY VISIBLE THROUGH THE EYE OF KNOWLEDGE

utkramantam sthitam vapi bhunjanam va gunanvitam
vimudha nanupasyanti pasyantijnana-caksusah (15.10)

utkramantam - departing the body, quitting the body; sthitam - staying,
remaining; va - or; api — also; bhunjanam — enjoying; va — or; guna-anvitam -
through contact with the constituents (Gunas); vimnudhah - the deluded; na —
not; anupasyanti - (do not) perceive; pasyanti — see; jnana-caksusah — those
who possess the eye of knowledge.

The deluded do not perceive whether he (Jiva) departs (from the body) or
remains therein, or whether, through contact with the constituents, he
tastes experience. But those who possess the eye of knowledge see. (15.10)

NO SELF-KNOWLEDGE WITHOUT YOGIC PRACTISES

yatanto yoginas caiman pasyanty atmany avasthitam
yatanto 'py akrtatmano nainam pasyanty acetasah (15.11)

yatantah — striving; yoginah - the yogis; ca — and; enam — this; pasyanti — can
see; atmani — in the self; avasthitam - established, situated; yatantah — striving;
api - also; akrta-atmanah - the uncontrolled; na — not; enam — this; pasyanti —
see; acetasah - without knowledge.

The Yogis also, striving, see Him established in the Self; though striving, the
uncontrolled, without knowledge, see Him not. (15.11)






THE LORD 'S IMMANENCE AS THE ALL-ILLUMINING LIGHT OF

CONSCIOUSNESS

yad aditya-gatam tejo jagad bhasayate 'khilam

yac candramasi yac cagnau tat tejo viddhi mamakam (15.12)

yat — which; aditya-gatam - centred in the sun; tejah - splendour; jagat - the
world; bhasayate - illumines, enlightens; akhilam — whole; yat — which;
candramasi — in the moon; yat — that which; ca — and; agnau - in the fire; tat —
that; tejah — splendour; viddhi — know; mamakam — from Me.

The splendour centred in the sun which enlightens the whole world, that
which is in the moon and in the fire, know that it (all) comes from Me. (See
also 13.17 and 15.06) (15.12)

THE LORD 'S ALL-SUSTAINING LIFE

gam avisya ca bhutani dharayamy aham ojasa

pusnami causadhih sarvah somo bhutva rasatmakah (15.13)

gam — the earth; avisya - penetrate, entering ; ca — and; bhutani — the beings;
dharayami - support, sustain; aham — I; ojasa — by (My) vital energy; pusnami
- (I) cause, nourish; ca — and; ausadhih - the herbs; sarvah — all; somah — the
moon; bhutva — becoming; rasa-atmakah - sap, watery, juice.

Likewise, I penetrate the earth, and support all beings by My vital energy;
becoming the Soma ( 'having become the sapid (watery) moon ' is the accepted
translation. Soma is a liquid drawn from the Soma-plant, or the moon-plant in
other words), the very sap (of life), I cause all the herbs to grow. (15.13)

aham vaisvanaro bhutva praninam deham asritah
pranapana-samayuktah pacamy annam catur-vidham (15.14)

aham — I; vaisvanarah -Vaisvanara, the fire of life; bhutva - having become;
praninam - (of the bodies) of all ; deham — the bodies (of all); asritah - abiding,
situated; prana — the outgoing air; apana — the down-going air; samayuktah -
conjoined, associated; pranapana-samayuktah - conjoined with Prana and
Apana; pacami - (I) digest; annam — food; catuh-vidham - fourfold, the four
kinds.

I, having become Vaisvanara (the Fire of life), take possession of the bodies
of all that breathes, conjoined with the life -breaths (Prana and Apana, the
inward and outward breaths), I digest the fourfold food. (15.14)






sarvasya caham hrdi sannivisto mattah smrtirjnanam apohanam ca
vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyo vedanta-krd veda-vid eva caham (15.15)

sarvasya — of all; ca — and; aham — I; hrdi — in the heart; sannivistah -
dwelling, seated, situated; mattah — from Me; smrtih — memory; jnanam —
knowledge; apohanam - non-attendance; ca — and; vedaih — by the Vedas; ca —
and; sarvaih — all; aham — I; eva — even; vedyah - to be known; vedanta-krt —
the maker of the Vedanta; veda-vit — the knower of the Vedas; eva — even; ca —
and; aham — I.

I make My dwelling in the hearts of all: from Me are memory and
knowledge, as well as their non-attendance. It is I who am to be known by
means of all the Vedas. I am the maker of the Vedanta, and also the knower
of the Vedas. (See also 6.39) (15.15)

BEYOND THE PERISHABLE AND IMPERISHABLE UNIVERSE

dvav imau purusau loke ksaras caksara eva ca
ksarah sarvani bhutani kuta-stho 'ksara ucyate (15.16)

dvau — two; imau — these; purusau - (two) Purushas; loke — in the world;
ksarah - the perishable; ca — and; aksarah - the imperishable; eva — even; ca —
and; ksarah - the perishable; sarvani — all; bhutani - all contingent beings;
kuta-sthah - (standing) firm, in firmness, immutable; aksarah - the
imperishable; ucyate — is called.

There are two Purushas (Energies) in the cosmos, the perishable (ksara) and
the Imperishable (aksara): the perishable is all contingent beings, the
Imperishable that which stands firm (kutastha). (15.16)

uttamah purusas tv anyah paramatmety udahrtah
yo loka-trayam avisya bibharty avyaya isvarah (15.17)

uttamah — the supreme; purusah — Purusha; tu — but; anyah — another; parama

— the Supreme; atma — Self; iti — thus; udahrtah — is called; yah — who; loka
trayam — the three worlds; avisya — pervading; bibharti — sustaining; avyayah -

- indestructible; isvarah — the Lord.

There is another Supreme Purusha (Energy, Person, and Supreme
Personality), called the Supreme Self, Indestructible Lord, pervading the
three worlds, and sustaining them. (15.17)






yasmat ksaram atito 'ham aksarad api cottamah
ato 'mi loke vede ca prathitah purusottamah (15.18)

yasmat - since, as; ksaram - the perishable; atitah - go beyond; aham — I ;
aksarat - than the imperishable; api — also; ca — and; uttamah — the best, more
exalted; atah — therefore; asmi - (I )am; loke — in the world; vede — in the
Veda; ca — and; prathitah - being exalted; purusa-uttamah — as the Supreme
Being.

Since I go beyond the perishable, and am more exalted than the
Imperishable Itself, in the world as well as in the Veda (Veddnta) I am
extolled as the Supreme Being (Purushottama, the Highest Purusha). (See also
MuU 2.01.02) (15.18)

THE GLORIOUS SELF-KNOWLEDGE

yo mam evam asammudho janati purusottamam

sa sarva-vid bhajati mam sarva-bhavena Bharata (15.19)

yah — who; mam — Me; evam — thus; asammudhah - free from delusion,
undeluded; janati — knows; purusa-uttamam — the Supreme Self; sah — he;
sarva-vit — the knower of everything, the all-knowing; bhajati — worships; mam
— Me; sarva-bhavena - with all his being; bharata — O Bharata, Arjuna.

He who knows Me, free from delusion, as the Supreme Self (Purushottama,
the Highest Purusha), he, knowing all, worships Me with all his being
(bhdva), O Bharata (Arjuna). (15.19)

iti guhyatamam sastram idam uktam mayanagha

etad buddhva buddhimnan syat krta-krtyas ca Bharata (15.20)

iti — thus; guhya-tamam — the most secret; sastram — teaching; idam — this;
uktam - has been revealed; maya — by Me; anagha — O sinless one; etat — this;
buddhva - this known, knowing; buddhi-man — enlightened; syat — become;
krta-krtyah - who has accomplished all his duties; ca — and; bharata — O
Bharata, Arjuna.

And so, this most secret teaching has been revealed by Me, O sinless one.
This known, let a man become enlightened, and all his duties are
accomplished, O Bharata (Arjuna). (15.20)

In the Upanisad of the Bhagavadglta, the knowledge of Brahman the
Supreme, the science of yoga, and the dialogue between Srlkrsna and






Arjuna, this is the fifteenth discourse entitled, "The Yoga of the Supreme

Self.






Sixteenth Discourse

The Divine and the Demoniacal Ways

THE DIVINE CHARACTERISTICS TO BE CULTIVATED FOR

SALVATION

sri-bhagavan uvaca
abhayam sattva-samsuddhir jnana-yoga-vyavasthitih
danam damas ca yajnas ca svadhyayas tapa arjavam (16.01)

sri-bhagavan uvaca — the Supreme Lord said; abhayam — fearlessness; sattva-
samsuddhih - purity of heart; jnana — in knowledge; yoga — yoga; vyavasthitih

— steadfastness; danam - open-handed, almsgiving, charity; damah - restraining
the senses (sense-restraint); ca — and; yajnah — sacrifice; ca — and; svadhyayah

— study of scriptures (Sastras); tapah — austerity; arjavam - integrity.

The Supreme Lord said: Fearlessness and purity of heart, steadfastness in
the yoga of knowledge, open-handed and sense-restraint, performing of
sacrifice (Yajna), intent on the study of scriptures, austerity and integrity.
(16.01)

ahimsa satyam akrodhas tyagah santir apaisunam
daya bhutesv aloluptvam mardavam hrir acapalam (16.02)

ahimsa - non-violence; satyam — truthfulness; akrodhah - absence of anger;
tyagah — renunciation; santih — peacefulness; apaisunam - averse to calumny;
daya — compassion; bhutesu - to living beings; aloluptvam — freedom from
greed; mardavam — gentleness; hrih — modesty; acapalam - absence of
fickleness.

Non-violence, truthfulness, absence of anger, renunciation, peacefulness,
averse to calumny, compassion to living beings, freedom from greed,
mildness, modesty, absence of fickleness. (16.02)

tejah ksama dhrtih saucam adroho nati-manita
bhavanti sampadam daivim abhijatasya bharata (16.03)

teiah — vigour; ksama — forgiveness; dhrtih — fortitude; saucam — purity;
adrohah - absence of hatred; na — not; ati manita — arrogance; bhavanti — are;
sampadam - state (is born); daivim - godlike, divine; abhijatasya — of one who
is born ; bharata — O Bharata, Arjuna.

Vigour, mercy, fortitude, purity, absence of hatred and arrogance - these
are his who is born to the godlike portion, O Bharata (Arjuna). (16.03)

THE DEMONIAC CHARACTERISTICS

dambho darpo 'bhimanas ca krodhah parusyam eva ca
ajnanam cabhijatasya partha sampadam asurim (16.04)

dambhah — hypocrisy; darpah — arrogance; abhimanah - excessive pride,
conceit; ca — and; krodhah — anger; parusyam - cruelty, harshness; eva — even;
ca — and; ajnanam — ignorance; ca — and; abhijatasya — of one who is born;
partha - O Partha, O son of Partha, Arjuna; sampadam - state, who is born;
asurim — the demoniac portion.

Hypocrisy, arrogance, excessive pride, anger and also cruelty and ignorance
are his who is born to the demoniac portion (Asuric; the Asuras were the
enemies of the Suras or Deities), O Partha (Arjuna) (16.04)

THE EFFECTS OF THE TWO CHARACTERISTICS

daivi sampad vimoksaya nibandhayasuri mata
ma sucah sampadam daivim abhijato 'si Pandava (16.05)

daivi - godlike, divine; sampat - state, portion; vimoksaya - (meant) for
delivrance; nibandhaya — for bondage; asuri — demoniac; mata - is deemed; ma
— not; sucah — grieve; sampadam - (are) born to, state; daivim - godlike,
divine; abhijatah — born to; asi — you are; pandava - O Pandave, O son of
Pandu, Arjuna.

The godlike portion is deemed for deliverance, and the demoniac for
bondage. But grieve not, O Pandava (Arjuna)\ You are born to a godlike
destiny. (16.05)

dvau bhuta-sargau loke 'smin daiva asura eva ca
daivo vistarasah prokta asuram partha me srnu (16.06)

dvau — two; bhuta-sargau - types of contingent beings; loke — in (the) world;
asmin - (in) this; daivah — godly; asurah — demoniac; eva — even; ca — and;
daivah — the divine; vistarasah - at length; proktah - have discoursed; asuram -
- the demoniac; partha - O Partha, O son of Partha, Arjuna; me — from Me; srnu
- now hear.

Basically, there are two orders of contingent beings in this world, the godly
and the demoniac. Of the godly I have discoursed at length, now hear from
Me, O Partha (Arjuna), about the demoniac. (16.06)

THE MATERIALISTIC DISPOSITIONS

pravrttim ca nivrttim ca jana na vidur asurah
na saucam napi cacaro na satyam tesu vidyate (16.07)

pravrttim — action; ca — and; nivrttim - cessation or inaction, (know not of right
abstinence); ca — and; janah - men, persons; na — not; viduh — know; asurah —
of demoniac nature; na — not; saucam — purity; na — not; api — also; ca — and;
acarah - good conduct; na — not; satyam — truth; tesu — in them; vidyate —
there is.

Those of demoniac nature know not of creative action (pravrtti) or of right
abstinence (cessation, nivritti); nor purity, nor good conduct, nor truth are
found in them. (16.07)

asatyam apratistham te jagad ahur anisvaram
aparaspara-sambhutam kim anyat kama-haitukam (16.08)

asatyam - without truth; apratistham - without firm foundation; te — they; jagat
- the world; ahuh — say; anisvaram — with a God; aparaspara - mutual law;
sambhutam - ruled, arisen; kim anyat - nothing else; kama-haitukam - driven
only by lust.

The world, they say, is without truth, without firm foundation, without a
God, not ruled by mutual law, driven only by lust (desire), and nothing else.
(16.08)

etam drstim avastabhya nastatmano 'lpa-buddhayah
prabhavanty ugra-karmanah ksayaya jagato 'hitah (16.09)

etam — this; drstim — view; avastabhya — holding; nasta atmanah - lost souls;
alpa-buddhayah - with small intellect; prabhavanti - come forth; ugra-
karmanah - embark on cruel and violent deeds; ksayaya — for the destruction;
jagatah — of the world; ahitah — enemies.

Holding fast to these views, these lost souls (atman) with small intellects they
embark on cruel and violent deeds, come forth as enemies for the
destruction of the world. (16.09)

kamam asritya duspuram dambha-mana-madanvitah
mohad grhitvasad-grahan pravartante 'suci-vratah (16.10)

kamam - (sensual) desire; asritya — taking shelter of, surrendering, abiding in;
duspuram — insatiable; dambha mana mada-anvitah - full of hypocrisy, pride
and arrogance; mohat - through delusion; grhitva — holding; asat — evil; grahan
- thoughts, ideas; pravartante — they act; asuci — impure; vratah — resolves.

Surrendering themselves in insatiable sensual desire, full of hypocrisy,
pride and arrogance, holding evil thoughts through delusion, they act with
impure resolves. (16.10)

cintam aparimeyam ca pralayantam upasritah
kamopabhoga-parama etavad iti niscitah (16.11)

cintam - preoccupied, cares; aparimeyam - limitless, unmeasurable; ca — and;
pralaya-antam — unto the point of death, right up to the time of death; upasritah
- yielding in; kama-upabhoga - satisfying the lusts, sense gratification;
par amah — the highest goal of life, as there would be nothing else (at nothing);
etavat - that this is all; iti — so; niscitah — convinced.

Preoccupied with limitless imaginings right up to the time of death, they
yield themselves at nothing but to satisfy their lusts, convinced that this is
all. (16.11)

asa-pasa-satair baddhah kama-krodha-parayanah
ihante kama-bhogartham anyayenartha-sancayan (16.12)

asa-pasa sataih - bound by hundreds ties of hope; baddhah — bound; kama — of
lust; krodha — and anger; parayanah - given over, obsessed; ihante — they
aspire; kama — lust; bhoga — sense enjoyment; artham — for the purpose of;
kama-bhogartham - satisfying sensual enjoyment; anyayena - illegally,
unjustly; artha — of wealth; sancayan - accumulate; artha-sancayan - hoards of
wealth.

Bound by a hundred ties of hope, obsessed by anger and desire, they aspire
unjustly to accumulate hoards of wealth, to satisfy their sensual
enjoyments. (16.12)






idam adya maya labdham imam prapsye manoratham
idam astidam api me bhavisyati punar dhanam (16.13)

idam — this; adya — today; maya — by me; labdham - has been gained; imam —
this; prapsye - (I) shall gratify, obtain; manah-ratham — desire; idam — this; asti
— is; idam — this; api — also; me — mine; bhavisyati - will be; punah — again;
dhanam - wealth.

"This I have gained today; this desire I shall gratify; this wealth is mine,
and much more too will be mine as time goes on." (16.13)

asau maya hatah satrur hanisye caparan api
isvaro 'ham aham bhogi siddho 'ham balavan sukhi (16.14)

asau — that; maya — by me; hatah - have killed; satruh — enemy; hanisye - (I)
will kill; ca — and; aparan — others; api — also; isvarah — lord; aham — I; aham
— I; bhogi — the enjoyer; siddhah — perfect; aham — I ; bala-van — powerful;
sukhi - happy.

"I have killed this enemy and many another too I will kill. I am a lord, I
take my pleasure; I am powerful, happy and successful." (16.14)

adhyo 'bhijanavan asmi ko 'nyo 'ti sadrso maya
yaksye dasyami modisya ity ajnana-vimohitah (16.15)

adhyah — rich; abhijana-van - of a good family, well-born; asmi -(I) am; kah —
who; anyah — else; asti — is; sadrsah — equal; maya - with me; yaksye - (I) will
sacrifice; dasyami — I will give alms; modisye - (I) will rejoice; iti — so; ajnana
— in ignorance; vimohitah - deluded.

"I am rich and of a good family. Who else can equal himself with me? I will
sacrifice, I will give alms, I will rejoice." So speaks the deluded in his
ignorance. (16.15)

aneka-citta-vibhranta moha-jala-samavrtah
prasaktah kama-bhogesu patanti narake 'sucau (16.16)

aneka-citta-vibhrantah - bewildered by all kinds of thoughts; moha-jala-
samavrtah - caught up in a delusion's web; prasaktah — obsessed; kama-
bhogesu - in satisfying sensual enjoyment; patanti - (they) fall; narake — into
hell; asucau — foul.

Bewildered by all kinds of thoughts, caught up in delusion's web, obsessed
in satisfying sensual enjoyment, they fall into the foul hell. (16.16)

atma-sambhavitah stabdha dhana-mana-madanvitah
yajante nama-yajnais te dambhenavidhi-purvakam (16.17)

atma-sambhavitah — self-conceited; stabdhah - puffed up; dhana-mana mada
anvitah - maddened with pride and wealth, filled with madness and intoxication
of wealth; yajante - (they) perform sacrifice; noma yajnaih - lip-sacrifices,
sacrifices in name (only); te — they; dambhena - out of pretension, out of pride;
avidhi-purvakam — without following any rules and regulations, not in the
prescribed way, contrary to scriptural ordinances.

Puffed up with self-conceit, stubborn, maddened by their pride of wealth
(or, filled with madness and intoxication of wealth), they make a show of
performing, lip -sacrifices only for pretension, and not in the prescribed
way. (16.17)

ahankaram balam darpam kamam krodham ca samsritah
mam atma-para-dehesu pradvisanto 'bhyasuyakah (16.18)

ahankaram — selfishness; balam — force; darpam — pride; kamam — lust;
krodham — anger; ca — and; samsritah — having taken shelter of, taking refuge
in, dwelling in; mam — Me; atma — in their own; para — and in other; dehesu —
bodies; pradvisantah — hating; abhyasuyakah - these malicious ones.

Given over to selfishness, force and pride, lust and anger, these malicious
ones hate Me who dwell in their bodies as I dwell in all. (16.18)

THE FALL OF MATERIALISM

tan aham dvisatah kruran samsaresu naradhaman
ksioamy ajashram asubhan asurisv eva yonisu (16.19)

tan — those; aham — I; dvisatah - the haters, ; kruran - barbarous, cruel;
samsaresu - in the world; nara-adhaman — the vilest among men; ksipami - I
cast; ajashram — forever; asubhan - evil, impure; asurisu — demoniac; eva —
only; yonisu — into the wombs.

These barbarous haters, cruel, evil, the vilest among men in the world, I
ever cast them down into demoniac wombs. (16.19)

asurim yonim apanna mudha janmani janmani
mam aprapyaiva Kaunteya tato yanty adhamam gatim (16.20)

asurim — demoniac; yonim — wombs; apannah - caught up in; mudhah — the
deluded; janmani janmani — in birth after birth; mam — Me; aprapya - never
reaching; eva — still; kaunteya - O Kaunteya, O son of Kunti, Arjuna; tatah -
than that, (and) so; yanti - go, tread, fall into; adhamam - lower, lowest; gatim -
- path.

Caught up in demoniac wombs, birth after birth deluded, they never reach
Me, O son of Kunti (Kaunteya, Arjuna), and so they tread the lowest path.
(16.20)

tri-vidham narakasyedam dvaram nasanam atmanah
kamah krodhas tatha lobhas tasmad etat trayam tyajet (16.21)

tri-vidham - triple, of three kinds; narakasya — of hell; idam — this; dvaram —
gate; nasanam — destructive; atmanah — of the self; kamah — lust; krodhah —
anger; tatha — also; lobhah — greed; tasmat — therefore; etat — these; trayam —
three; tyajet- (one) must give up, (one) should abandon, avoid.

Triple is the gate of this hell, destructive of the self: lust, anger, and greed.
Therefore, avoid these three. (See also MB 5.33.66) (16.21)

LIBERATION FROM THE FETTERS OF DARKNESS

etair vimuktah Kaunteya tamo-dvarais tribhir narah
acaraty atmanah sreyas tato yati param gatim (16.22)

etaih — from these; vimuktah - made free, freed, being liberated; kaunteya - O
Kaunteya, O son of Kunti, Arjuna; tamah-dvaraih — gates of darkness; tribhih —
of three kinds; narah - the man; acarati - performs, practises, works; atmanah -
- for one's (self), one's own; sreyah — salvation; tatah — thereby; yati - he
treads; param — the supreme; gatim — goal.

Once a man is freed from these three gates of darkness, O son of Kunti
(Kaunteya, Arjuna), then can he work for self s salvation (sreyas), and
thereby treading the Supreme Goal. (16.22)

THE SCRIPTURE IS A SURE GUIDE

yah sastra-vidhim utsrjya vartate kama-karatah
na sa siddhim avapnoti na sukham na param gatim (16.23)

yah — who; sastra-vidhim — the ordinances of the scriptures; utsrjya - forsaking,
cast aside, giving up; vartate - living in (lives), acting (acts); kama-karatah - in
the promptings of his own desires, under the impulses of desire; na - not, never;
sah — he; siddhim — perfection; avapnoti — attains; na - not, never; sukham —
happiness; na - not, never; param — supreme; gatim — goal.

He, who forsakes the ordinances of scripture, and lives in the promptings of
his own desires, attains not perfection, finding no comfort (sukha), nor the
Supreme Goal. (16.23)

tasmac chastram pramanam te karyakarya-vyavasthitau
jnatva sastra-vidhanoktam karma kartum iharhasi (16.24)

tasmat — therefore; sastram - Sastra, the scriptures; pramanam - (be) authority;
te — your; karya akarya vyavasthitau — in determining what is right and wrong;
jnatva — knowing; sastra — of scripture; vidhana - the ordinances, the
regulations; uktam -as bids (you to do), as declared; karma — action; kartum -
to do; iha — in this world; arhasi — you should.

Therefore, let the scripture be your authority, determining what is right
and wrong. Once you know what the ordinance of scripture bids you to do,
you should act accordingly in this world. (16.24)

In the Upanisad of the Bhagavadglta, the knowledge of Brahman the

Supreme, the science of yoga, and the dialogue between Srlkrsna and

Arjuna, this is the sixteenth discourse entitled, "The Divine and the

Demoniac Ways".






Seventeenth Discourse

The Yoga of the Threefold Faith

A QUESTION FOR SELF-ASSURANCE

arjuna uvaca
ye sastra-vidhim utsrjya yajante sraddhayanvitah
tesam nistha tu ka Krsna sattvam aho rajas tamah (17.01)

arjunah uvaca — Arjuna said; ye — those who; sastra-vidhim — the ordinances of
the scriptures (Sastras); utsrjya - endowed, giving up, setting aside, forsaking;
yajante - offer sacrifices; sraddhaya — full faith; anvitah - endowed, possessed
of; tesam — of them; nistha - condition (where do they stand); tu — verily; ka —
what; krsna — O Krsna; sattvam - Sattva, in goodness; aho — or; rajah - Rajas,
in passion; tamah -Tamas, in ignorance.

Arjuna said: Those who forsake the ordinances of the Sastras (scriptures),
and offer sacrifices full of faith (Sraddha), where do they stand, O Krsna? Is
it one of goodness (Sattva, Sdttvika), passion (Rajas, Rdjasika), ignorance
(Tamas, Tdmasika, darkness)? (17.01) (The three qualities or attributes, Sattva,
Rajas, Tamas are used here in their moral correspondences.)

THE THREE KINDS OF SRADDHA (FAITH)

sri-bhagavan uvaca
tri-vidha bhavati Sraddha dehinam sa svabhava-ja
sattviki rajasi caiva tamasi ceti tarn srnu (17.02)

sri-bhagavan uvaca — the Supreme Lord said; tri-vidha - threefold, of three
kinds; bhavati — is; sraddha — the faith; dehinam — of the embodied; sa —
which; sva-bhava-ja - along one's own inner character (nature), according to his
mode of material nature; sattviki - Sattvika, in the mode of goodness; rajasi -
Rajasika, in the mode of passion; ca — and; eva — even; tamasi - Tamasika, in
the mode of ignorance; ca — and; iti — so; tarn — that; srnu — hear now (to this).

The Supreme Lord said: Threefold is the faith (Sraddha) of embodied souls,
along one's own inner character, either of goodness (Sdttvic), of passion
(Rdjasic), and of ignorance (Tdmasic). Hear now to this. (17.02)

sattvanurupa sarvasya sraddha bhavati bharata
sraddha-mayo 'yam puruso yo yac-chraddhah sa eva sah (17.03)

sattva-anurupa -is shaped in accordance to one's own nature; sarvasya — of
each; sraddha — faith; bhavati — is; bharata - O Bharata, Arjuna; sraddha —
faith; mayah - instinct with; ayam — this; purusah — man; yah — who; yat
sraddhah - as (his) faith is; sah — thus; eva — verily; sah - (so is)he.

The faith (Sraddha) of each is shaped to one's own nature, O Bharata

(Arjuna). Man is instinct with faith (Sraddha) (that is, the man 's faith shows
what his character is): as his faith is, so is he. (17.03)

THOSE OF RAJ ASIC AND TAMASIC FAITHS

yajante sattvika devan yaksa-raksamsi rajasah
pretan bhuta-ganams canye yajante tamasa janah (17.04)

yajante — worship; sattvikah - the Sattvika ones, those who are in the mode of
goodness; devan - the gods; yaksa-raksamsi — the Yakshas and the Rakshasas,
the minor gods and demons, the gnomes and giants; rajasah -the Rajasikas,
those who are in the mode of passion; pretan — ghosts; bhuta-ganan - the
assembled spirits of the dead, the hosts of Bhutas or the nature-spirits; ca — and;
anye - the others; yajante — worship; tamasah - the Tamasika, in the mode of
ignorance; janah — people.

The Sattvika ones (those of goodness) offer sacrifice (worship) to the Gods;
the Rajasika (those of passion) to the gnomes and giants (the Yakshas and the
Rakshasas, the minor gods and demons)', while the others, the Tamasika ones
(the ignorant, or those of darkness) sacrifice to the ghosts (Pretas) and the
assembled spirits of the dead (Bhutas). (Pretas, ghosts, are departed beings,
while Bhutas, nature -spirits) (17.04)

asastra-vihitam ghoram tapyante ye tapo janah
dambhahankara-samyuktah kama-raga-balanvitah (17.05)

asastra vihitam - without regard to scripture's words, not enjoined by the
scripture; ghoram - terrific, fierce; tapyante - perform, practise; ye — they who;
tapah — austerities; janah - persons, men; dambhahankara-samyuktah - given
to hypocrisy and egotism ; kama-raga-balanvitah - (yielding) to the violence of
(their) passion and desire, by the force of passion and desire (attachment to
something).

They who perform fierce austerities without regard to scripture's words,
given to hypocrisy and egotism, yielding to the violence of their passion and
desire. (17.05)

karsayantah sarira-stham bhuta-gramam acetasah
mam caivantah sarira-stham tan viddhy asura-niscayan (17.06)

karsayantah — tormenting; sarira-stham - (tormenting) their bodily, within the
body; bhuta-gramam -organs, all the elements; acetasah — foolishly; mam —
Me; ca — and; eva — even; antah — within; sarira-stham - dwell within the
body; tan — them; viddhi — know; asura-niscayan - to be of demoniac resolve.

Foolishly tormenting their bodily organs, and Me also, who dwell within the
body, know these to be of demoniac resolve. (17.06)

THREEFOLD FOOD, YAJNA (SACRIFICE), PENANCE, ALMSGIVING

aharas tv api sarvasya tri-vidho bhavati priyah
yajnas tapas tatha danam tesam bhedam imam srnu (17.07)

aharah — food; tu - indeed, certainly; api — also; sarvasya — of all; tri-vidhah —
threefold; bhavati — is; priyah — dear; yajnah — sacrifice; tapah — austerity;
tatha — also; danam — almsgiving; tesam — them; bhedam — the difference;
imam — this; srnu — hear.

The food also which is dear to all is threefold, as also Yajna (sacrifice),
penance (ascetic practice, austerities) and the gift of alms. Listen to the
difference between them. (17.07)

ayuh-sattva-balarogya- sukha-priti vivardhanah
rasyah snigdhah sthira hrdya aharah sattvika-priyah (17.08)

ayuh - (augment a fuller) life; sattva - vitality; bala — strength; arogya —
health; sukha - pleasure, joy; priti - and good feeling; vivardhanah —
increasing; rasyah - that are savoury; snigdhah — mild; sthirah — strengthening;
hrdyah — vigourous; aharah — foods; sattvika - Sattivika, to one in goodness;
priyah — dear.

The foods that augment a fuller life, strength, health, vitality (Sattva),
pleasure and good feeling, foods that are savoury, mild, strengthening,
vigorous, are dear to the Sattivika (those in the mode of goodness). (17.08)

katv-amla-lavanaty-usna- tiksna-ruksa-vidahinah
ahara rajasasyesta duhkha-sokamaya-pradah (17.09)

katu — bitter; amla — sour; lavana — salty; ati usna - over-hot; tiksna —
pungent; ruksa — dry; vidahinah — burning; aharah — food; rajasasya - to the
Rajasika, to one in the mode of passion; istah - are liked, are dear; duhkha —
pain; soka - sorrow, grief; amaya - sickness, disease; pradah - bringing,
causing.

The food that are bitter, sour, salty, over-hot, pungent, dry and burning,
are the victuals dear to the Rajasika (those in the mode of passion), and bring
pain, sorrow and sickness. (17.09)

yata-yamam gata-rasam puti paryusitam ca yat
ucchistam api camedhyam bhojanam tamasa-priyam (17.10)

yata-yamam - (is, are) stale; gata-rasam — tasteless; puti - decayed, putrid;
paryusitam - rotten, decomposed; ca — and; yat — that which; ucchistam - rests
of food eaten by others, leavings; api — also; ca — and; amedhyam — unclean;
bhojanam — foods; tamasa - Tamasika, of those in the mode of darkness;
priyam — dear.

Whatever foods are stale and tasteless, rotten and decayed, things that are
leavings and unclean are the choice of the Tamasika (those in the mode of
ignorance, darkness). (17.10)

THE THREE KINDS OF YAJNA (SACRIFICE), WORSHIP

aphalakanksibhir yajno vidhi-disto ya ijyate
yastavyam eveti manah samadhaya sa sattvikah (17.11)

aphala-akanksibhih — by those devoid of desire for result, by men desiring no
fruit, by those who would not taste its fruits; yajnah — sacrifice; vidhi-distah -
approved by holy ordinance, according to the direction of scripture; yah —
which; ijyate — is offered; yastavyam - ought to be performed, ought to be
offered; eva — only; iti — so; manah — mind; samadhaya - fixing, concentrate;
sah - it, that; sattvikah - Sattvika, in the mode of goodness.

The Yajna (sacrifice, service, seva, meritorious deeds, a Vedic rite) approved
by holy ordinance, and offered by those who would not taste its fruits, who
concentrate their minds on the next alone: the firm belief that Yajna
(sacrifice, etc..) is duty, that is Sattvic (in the mode of goodness). (17.11)

abhisandhaya tu phalam dambhartham api caiva yat
ijyate bharata-srestha tarn yajnam viddhi rajas am (17.12)

abhisandhaya - bearing (in mind), looking for, desiring; tu — indeed; phalam —
fruit; dambha artham - for mere pretension; api — also; ca — and; eva — even;
yat — which; ijyate — is offered; bharata-srestha — O best of the Bharatas,
Arjuna; tarn — that; yajnam — sacrifice; viddhi — know; rajasam - Rajasic, in
the mode of passion.

The sacrifice that is offered up by those who bear its fruits in mind, and for
mere pretension, O best of the Bharatas (Arjuna), know them to be the
Rajasic (in the mode of passion). (17.12)

vidhi-hinam asrstannam mantra-hinam adaksinam
sraddha-virahitam yajnam tamasam paricaksate (17.13)

vidhi-hinam - contrary to proper ritual ordinances; asrsta-annam - in which no
food is distributed; mantra-hinam - no sacred words recited (with no chanting
of the Vedic hymns, devoid of Mantras); adaksinam - with no Brahman's fees
paid up (with no remunerations to the priests); sraddha — faith; virahitam —
without; yajnam — sacrifice; tamasam - Tamasika, in the mode of ignorance;
paricaksate — is said.

Yajna (sacrifice, etc..) contrary to proper ritual ordinances, in which no
food is distributed (prasadam), no sacred words recited (mantras chanted or
recited), no Brahman's fees paid up (covering gifts to the officiating priests),
no faith (Sraddha) enshrined, is said to be Tamasic (in the mode of ignorance,
darkness). (17.13)

PHYSICAL PENANCE

deva-dvija-guru-prajna- pujanam saucam ariavam
brahmacaryam ahimsa ca sariram tapa ucyate (17.14)

deva - to the Gods; dvija - the twice-born; guru — the teachers; prajna - the
wise, the learned, theologians; pujanam — worship; saucam — purity; arjavam —
integrity; brahmacaryam - continence, celibacy; ahimsa - non-violence; ca —
and; sariram - of the body; tapah — austerity; ucyate — is said to be, is called, is
described.

Worship given to the Gods, to the twice-born, gurus (spiritual teachers), and
the wise (the learned), purity, integrity, continence (celibacy even in
marriage, chastity), non-violence (harmlessness), are described as bodily
penance. (17.14)



PENANCE OF THE TONGUE (SPEECH)

anudvega-karam vakyam satyam priya-hitam ca yat
svadhyayabhyasanam caiva van-mayam tapa ucyate (17.15)

anudvega-karam - serenity of mind; vakyam - speech, words; satyam — truthful;
priya - dear, pleasant; hitam — beneficial; ca — and; yat — which; svadhyaya
abhyasanam - the practice of sacred recitation; ca — and; eva — also; vak-
mayam — of the tongue (speech); tapah — austerity; ucyate — is said to be, is
called, is termed.

Words that do not cause offence, that are truthful, pleasant and beneficial,
and also the practice of sacred recitation, are termed the penance of the
tongue (or, the word). (17.15)

MENTAL PENANCE

manah-prasadah saumyatvam maunam atma-vinigrahah
bhava-samsuddhir ity etat tapo manasam ucyate (17.16)

manah-prasadah - serenity of mind; saumyatvam - friendliness, good-
heartedness; maunam — silence; atma vinigrahah - self-control; bhava
samsuddhih - of purity of feelings; iti — so; etat — this; tapah — austerity;
manasam — of the mind; ucyate — is said to be, is called.

Serenity of mind and friendliness, silence and self-control, and purity of
feelings (bldva), this is called the penance of the mind. (17.16)



THE THREE KINDS OF PENANCE ACCORDING TO THE GUNAS

(MODES OF...)

sraddhaya paraya taptam tapas tat tri-vidham naraih
aphalakanksibhir yuktaih sattvikam paricaksate (17.17)

sraddhaya — with faith; paraya — utmost; taptam — practised; tapah — austerity;
tat — that; tri-vidham — threefold; naraih — by men; aphala-akanksibhih -
desiring no fruit; yuktaih — (mind) in total control; engaged; sattvikam -
Sattvika, in the mode of goodness; paricaksate — is called, is described.

These threefold forms of penance, practised by men with utmost faith
(Sraddha), desiring no fruit, with a mind in total control, are described as
Sattvika (in the mode of goodness). (17.17)

satkara-mana-pujartham tapo dambhena caiva yat
kriyate tad iha proktam rajasam calam adhruvam (17.18)

sat-kara — respect; mana — honour; puja — and worship; artham - with the view
of, for the sake of; tapah — austerity; dambhena — with (sheer) hyprocrisy; ca —
and; eva — even; yat — which; kriyate — is practised; tat — that; iha — here;
proktam — is said; rajasam - Rajasika, in the mode of passion; calam —
unstable; adhruvam — transcient.

These penances which is practised with the view of obtaining respect,
honour and reverence, or from sheer hypocrisy, are here said to be Rajasic
(in the mode of passion), unstable and transient. (17.18)

mudha-grahenatmano yat pidaya kriyate tapah
parasyotsadanartham va tat tamasam udahrtam (17.19)

mudha grahena - out of perverted theories; atmanah — of the self; yat — which;
pidaya — through self-torture; kriyate — is performed; tapah — penances;
parasya — others; utsadana-artham - with the object of hurting; va — or; tat —
that; tamasam - Tamasika, in the mode of darkness; udahrtam — is declared to
be.

These penances performed out of perverted theories, through self-torture,
or with the object of hurting others, is declared to be Tamasic (in the mode
of ignorance). (17.19)

THE THREE KINDS OF ALMSGIVING

data vy am iti yad danam diyate 'nupakarine
dese kale ca patre ca tad danam sattvikam smrtam (17.20)

datavyam — worth giving, ought to be given ; iti — so; yat — that which; danam
- almsgiving, charity; diyate — is given; anupakarine — whom no favour is
expected in return; dese - at the right place; kale - in time; ca — and; patre — to
a worthy person; ca — and; tat — that; danam — alms; sattvikam - Sattvika, in
the mode of goodness; smrtam — is called.

Alms given to one from whom no favour is expected in return, in the belief
that it is one's sacred duty to give, at the right place and time, to a worthy
person, is called alms given in a Sattvic way (in the mode of goodness).
(17.20)

yat tu Pratyupakarartham phalam uddisya va punah
diyate ca pariklistam tad danam rajasam smrtam (17.21)

yat — that which; tu — but; prati-upakara-artham - of receiving favours in
return; phalam — fruit; uddisya - for the sake (of reapin); va — or; punah —
again; diyate — is given; ca — and; pariklistam — reluctantly; tat — that; danam -
(that) giving; rajasam - Rajasika, in the mode of passion; smrtam — is
understood to be, is held to be.

But alms given in expectation of receiving favours in return, or for the sake
of reaping some fruit afterwards, or again reluctantly, that giving is held to
be Rajasic (in the mode of passion). (17.21)

adesa-kale yad danam apatrebhyas ca diyate
asat-krtam avajnatam- tat tamasam udahrtam (17.22)

adesa — at the wrong place; kale — and time; yat — that; danam — alms;
apatrebhyah — to unworthy persons; ca — and; diyate — is given; asat-krtam —
without respect; avajnatam - or, with insult; tat — that; tamasam - Tamasika, in
the mode of darkness; udahrtam — is declared to be.

Alms given at the wrong place and time, to unworthy persons, without
respect or with insult that is declared to be Tamasic (in the mode of
ignorance). (17.22)


PERFECTING THE SPIRITUAL WALK OF LIFE, AND
THREEFOLD ASPECT OF BRAHMAN (ETERNAL BEING)

om tat sad iti nirdeso brahmanas tri-vidhah smrtah
brahmanas tena vedas ca yajnas ca vihitah pura (17.23)

om tat sat - Om Tat Sat; iti — so; nirdesah - (triple) pointer; brahmanah — of
Brahman; tri-vidhah — threefold; smrtah - is created, considered, declared;
brahmanah — the Brahmanas; tena — by that; vedah — the Vedas; ca — and;
yajnah — sacrifices; ca — and; vihitah — created; pura — formerly.

"Om, Tat, Sat": This has been considered as a threefold pointer to
Brahman (Eternal Being). Through this, were created, in the beginning, the
Brahmanas (the knowers of Brahman, or the priests, or intellectual class of
India), and Vedas and Yajnas (sacrificial rites) ordained. (17.23)

tasmad om ity udahrtya yajna-dana-tapah-kriyah
pravartante vidhanoktah satatam brahma-vadinam (17.24)

tasmat — therefore; om - Om, AUM; iti — so; udahrtya — uttering; yajna — of
sacrifice; dana - giving of alms; tapah — and penance; kriyah - the acts;
pravartante — begin; vidhana-uktah - in conformity to ordinances; satatam —
always; brahma-vadinam - by Brahman's devotees.

Therefore, by uttering "Om", are the acts of sacrifice, the giving of alms
and penance accomplished, in conformity to ordinances (Vedic scriptures),
ever again enacted by Brahman's devotees. (17.24)

tad ity anabhisandhaya phalam yajna-tapah-kriyah
dana-kriyas ca vividhah kriyante moksa-kanksibhih (17.25)

tat — that; iti — so; anabhisandhaya - having no thought for; phalam — fruits;
yajna — of sacrifice; tapah — and penance; kriyah — acts; dana - gift (of alms);
kriyah — acts; ca — and; vividhah — various; kriyante — are performed; moksa-
kanksibhih — by those who seek liberation.

With the utterance of "Tat" (That), do those who seek liberation (Moksa,
Nirvana, Mukti), perform the various acts of sacrifice, penance and the gift
of alms, having no thought for the fruits they produce. (17.25)

sad-bhave sadhu-bhave ca sad ity etat prayujyate
prasaste karmani tatha sac-chabdah partha yujyate (17.26)

sad-bhave — in the sense of the real; sadhu-bhave — in the sense of the good; ca
— and; sat — Sat; iti — so; etat — this; prayujyate — is used; prasaste - (works)
that call for praise, auspicious; karmani — acts; tatha — likewise; sat-sabdah —
the word sat; partha — O Partha, Arjuna; yujyate — is used.

"Sat" (It Is) is used to indicate the Real and the Good; the word "Sat" is
likewise used, O Partha (Arjuna), for works that call forth praise. (17.26)

yajne tapasi dane ca sthitih sad iti co' cyate
karma caiva tad-arthiyam sad ity evabhidhiyate (17.27)

yajne — in sacrifice; tapasi — in penance; dane - in gift, in giving of alms; ca —
and; sthitih — steadfast; sat — Sat; iti — so; ca — and; ucyate — is called; karma —
work; ca - and; eva — also; tadarthiyam - for the sake; sat — Sat; zft' — so; eva —
even; abhidhiyate — is indicated, is known, is called.

Steadfastness in sacrifice, penance, the giving of alms, is also called "Sat",
and any action for the sake of the Supreme (Tat) is equally known as "Sat".
(17.27)

WORKS WITHOUT FAITH ARE FRUITLESS

asraddhaya hutam dattam tapas taptam krtam ca yat
asad ity ucyate Partha na ca tat pretya no iha (17.28)

asraddhaya — without faith; hutam - is sacrificed; dattam — given; tapah —
penance; taptam - is practised; krtam — performed; ca — and; yat — whatever;
asat - Asat (false); iti — so; ucyate — is called; partha — O Partha, Arjuna; na —
not; ca — and; tat — that; pretya — after death, hereafter (after death), the next
world; na— not; iha — in this world.

Whatever is sacrificed, any giving, any penance, or any other deed,
practised without faith (Sraddhd), it is called "Asat", O Partha (Arjuna); of
no benefit in this world and the next (both in this life and the next). (17.28)

In the Upanisad of the Bhagavadglta, the knowledge of Brahman the

Supreme, the science of yoga, and the dialogue between Srlkrsna and

Arjuna, this is the seventeenth discourse entitled, "The Yoga of the

Threefold Faith".






Eighteenth Discourse

The Yoga of Liberation by Renunciation

WHAT IS THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN 'SANNYASA' AND 'TYAGA'

arjuna uvaca
sannyasasya maha-baho tattvam icchami veditum
tyagasya ca hrsikesa prthak kesi-nisudana (18.01)

arjunah uvaca — Arjuna said; sannyasasya — of renunciation; maha-baho — O
mighty-armed; tattvam — the truth; icchami - (I) desire, wish; veditum — to
know; tyagasya — of abandonment, of Tyaga; ca — and; hrsikesa — O Hrsikesa
(Krsna); prthak — difference; kesi- nisudana — O slayer of the Kesin (demon),
Krsna.

Arjuna said: O Mighty-armed, O Hrsikesa (Krsna), I desire to know from
You the truth concerning renunciation (sannydsa) as well as of
abandonment (tyaga), with their difference, O Kesinisudana (O Slayer of
Kesin, Krsna). (18.01)

sri-bhagavan uvaca
kamyanam karmanam nyasam sannyasam kavayo viduh
sarva-karma-phala-tyagam prahus tyagam vicaksanah (18.02)

sri-bhagavan uvaca — the Supreme Lord said; kamyanam - by desire;
karmanam - works, actions; nyasam — renunciation; sannyasam - renunciation;
kavayah — the Sages; viduh — know; sarva — of all; karma — works; phala — of
the fruits; tyagam — abandonment; prahuh - call, say, declare; tyagam -
renunciation, abandonment; vicaksanah — the learned.

The Supreme Lord said: To give up works dictated by desire, Sages know
this to be renunciation (sannydsa); the abandonment of the fruit of all
works, say the learned, is tyaga (renunciation, abandonment). (See also 5.01,

tyajyam dosa-vad ity eke karma prahur manisinah
yajna-dana-tapah-karma na tyajyam iti capare (18.03)

tyajyam - should be given up; dosa-vat — as an evil; iti — so; eke — some; karma
— action; prahuh — they say; manisinah — great thinkers, the learned; yajna — of
sacrifice; dona - gift (of alms); tapah — and penance; karma - deeds, actions; na

— not; tyajyam - should be abandoned; iti — so; ca — and; apare — others.

Some learned men say that actions, tainted with defect, should be given up;
but, others say that actions of sacrifice, the gift of alms and deeds of
penance should not be abandoned. (18.03)

niscayam srnu me tatra tyage bharata-sattama
tyago hi purusa-vyaghra tri-vidhah samprakirtitah (18.04)

niscayam — conclusions; srnu — hear; me — Me; tatra — there; tyage - as to
abandonment; bharata-sat-tama — O best of the Bharatas, Arjuna; tyagah —
abandonment; hi — indeed; purusa-vyaghra — O best of men (O tiger of men,
Arjuna); tri-vidhah — of three kinds; samprakirtitah — is regarded.

Hear then My own conclusions as to abandonment (tydga), O best of the
Bharatas (Arjuna). Indeed, O best of men (O tiger of men, Arjuna),
abandonment (tydga) is regarded as being threefold. (The word 'sannydsa ' is
the way it is pronounced, but written 'samnydsa '. Samnydsa and Tydga, are
synonyms, they both mean abandonment, renunciation, and acts of giving up.)
(18.04)

yajna-dana-tapah-karma na tyajyam karyam eva tat
yajno danam tapas caiva pavanani manisinam (18.05)

yajna — of sacrifice; dona - (of) gift; tapah — and (deeds of) penance; karma -
acts, actions; na — not; tyajyam — to be abandoned; karyam — should be done;
eva — indeed; tat — that; yajnah — sacrifice; danam — gift; tapah — penance; ca -

- and; eva — indeed; pavanani — purifiers; manisinam - of the intelligent.

Acts of sacrifice, the gift of alms and deeds of penance are not to be
abandoned, but should most certainly be done, because sacrifice, alms-
giving and penance (ascetic practise) are purifiers of the intelligent. (18.05)

THE DUTIFUL WORKS SHOULD BE PERFORMED WITHOUT

ATTACHMENT

etany api tu karmani sangam tyaktva phalani ca
kartavyaniti me Partha niscitam matam uttamam (18.06)

etani — these; api — even; tu — but; karmani — actions; sangam — attachment;
tyaktva — abandoning; phalani — fruit; ca — and; kartavyani — should be done;
iti — so; me — My; partha - Partha, O son of Partha, Arjuna; niscitam —
certain; matam — belief; uttamam — the best, supreme.

But even these actions should be done, detachedly and abandoning the fruit,
O Partha (Arjuna), this is My certain and supreme belief. (18.06)

TAMASIC AND RAJ ASIC MODES ARE PURPOSELESS

niyatasya tu sannyasah karmano nopapadyate
mohat tasya parityagas tamasah parikirtitah (18.07)

niyatasya — prescribed; tu - for sure; sannyasah — renunciation; karmanah — of
action; na — not; upapadyate — is appropriate; mohat — from illusion; tasya — of
the same; parity agah — renunciation; tamasah - Tamasika, in the mode of
ignorance; parikirtitah — is declared.

For to renounce actions (duties) that are prescribed (by scripture) is
inappropriate; delusively to give it up is Tamasic (in the mode of ignorance,
darkness). This (also) has been declared. (18.07)

duhkham ity eva yat karma kaya-klesa-bhayat tyajyt
sa krtva rajasam tyagam naiva tyaga-phalam labhet (18.08)

duhkham - causing pain, painful; iti — so; eva — even; yat — which; karma —
action; kaya - bodily, body; klesa - distress, trouble; bhayat — out of fear
(giving up an action because it causes pain); tyajet — gives up; sah — he; krtva —
commiting; rajasam - Rajasika, in the mode of passion; tyagam —
abandonment; na — not; eva — even; tyaga — abandonment; phalam — the fruit;
labhet — reaps.

The one who gives up an action simply because it causes pain, or because he
shrinks from bodily distress, commits an act of abandonment that accords
with Rajasika (in the mode of passion); for sure the person will not reap the
fruit of abandonment (tyaga). (18.08)

SATTVIKA NA TURE IS INDISPENSABLE

karyam ity eva yat karma niyatam kriyate 'rjuna
sangam tyaktva phalam caiva sa tyagah sattviko matah (18.09)

karyam — it should be done; iti — so; eva — even; yat — which; karma — action;
niyatam — prescribed; kriyate — is achieved; arjuna — O Arjuna; sangam —
attachment; tyaktva - abandoning, giving up; phalam — the fruit; ca — and; eva -
- even; sah — that; tyagah — abandonment; sattvikah - Sattvika, in the mode of
goodness; matah - is held.

Whatever obligatory action is achieved, saying, "it should be done", O
Arjuna, abandoning attachment and also the fruit, that abandonment is
held to be Sattvika (in the mode of goodness). (18.09)

na dvesty akusalam karma kusale nanusajjate
tyagi sattva-samavisto medhavi chinna-samsayah (18.10)

na — not; dvesti — hates; akusalam — disagreeable; karma — work; kusale - to
the agreeable one; na — not; anusajjate - cleaves, is attached; tyagi — the
renouncer; sattva - with goodness; samavistah - suffused, absorbed; medhavi —
intelligent; chinna - free from, having cut off; samsayah - from doubts.

The renouncer suffused with goodness (sattva), with a calm understanding,
free from doubts, hates not his disagreeable work nor cleaves to the
agreeable one. (18.10)

na hi deha-bhrta sakyam tyaktum karmany asesatah
yas tu karma-phala-tyagi sa tyagity abhidhiyate (18.11)

na — never; hi — verily; deha-bhrta - for the embodied; sakyam — is possible;
tyaktum — to be abandoned; karmani — actions; asesatah — completely; yah —
who; tu — but; karma — of actions; phala — the fruits; tyagi — the renouncer; sah
— he; tyagi — the renouncer; iti — so; abhidhiyate — is said, who deserves.

For an embodied being it is not possible to abandon actions completely;
rather it is he who abandons the fruits of actions who deserves the name of
a renouncer. (18.11)

anistam istam misram ca tri-vidham karmanah phalam
bhavaty atyaginam pretya na tu sannyasinam kvacit (18.12)

anistam — unwanted; istam — wanted; misram — mixed; ca — and; tri-vidham —
threefold; karmanah — of action; phalam — the fruit; bhavati — experiences;
atyaginam — for those who have not renounced; pretya — after death; na — not;
tu — but; sannyasinam - to renouncers; kvacit - but not (those).

Threefold is the fruit of action, unwanted, wanted and mixed, which the one
who has not renounced, experiences after death, but not those who have
renounced. (18.12)

THE COMPONENTS OF KARMA IN THE ACTING

pancaitani maha-baho karanani nibodha me
sankhye krtante proktani siddhaye sarva-karmanam (18.13)

panca — five; etani — these; maha-baho — O mighty-armed, Arjuna; karanani —
causes; nibodha- learn; me — from Me; sankhye — in the Sankhya; krta-ante -
for the accomplishment; proktani - as declared, as laid down; siddhaye — for the
accomplishment; sarva — of all; karmanam - actions.

Learn from Me, O mighty-armed (Arjuna), these five factors as laid down in
the philosophy of the Sankhya, for the accomplishment of all actions:
(18.13)

adhisthanam tatha karta karanam ca prthag-vidham
vividhas ca prthak cesta daivam caivatra pancamam (18.14)

adhisthanam — the physical body; tatha — also; karta — the doer; karanam - the
organs; ca — and; prthak-vidham — various; vividhah — various; ca — and;
prthak — different; cestah — the impulses; daivam — the presiding deities; ca —
and; eva — even; atra — here; pancamam — the fifth.

They are: The physical body, the doer, the various kinds of organs, the
different impulses, and the fifth, the presiding deities. (18.14)

sarira-van-manobhir yat karma prarabhate narah
nyayyam va viparitam va pancaite tasya hetavah (18.15)

sarira — by the body; vak — speech; manobhih — and mind; yat — whatever;
karma — action; prarabhate — performs; narah — a man; nyayyam — right; va —
or; viparitam — the opposite, the reverse (no matter whether right or wrong); va
— or; panca — five; ete — these; tasya — its; hetavah - causes.

Whatever action a man may undertake, by his body, speech or mind, no
matter whether right or wrong, these are its five causes. (18.15)

THE AGENCY OF THE LOWER SELF IS AN ILLUSION

tatraivam sati kartaram atmanam kevalam tu yah
pasyaty akrta-buddhitvan na sa pasyati durmatih (18.16)

tatra — there; evam — so; sati — being; kartaram — the agent; atmanam —
himself; kevalam — only; tu - really, verily; yah — who; pasyati — sees; akrta-
buddhitvat - untrained his intelligence; na — not; sah — he; pasyati — sees;
durmatih - perverted in thought, intelligence.

That being so, the man who sees himself alone, as the agent, does not see at
all. Untrained is his intelligence, and perverted are his thoughts. (18.16)

REALISATION OF THE NON-AGENCY OF THE LOWER SELF LEADS
TO RELEASE FROM THE EFFECTS OF ALL WORKS

yasya nahankrto bhavo buddhir yasya na lipyate
hatvapi sa imal lokan na hanti na nibadhyate (18.17)

yasya — whose; na — not; ahankrtah — egoistic; bhavah — nature; buddhih —
intelligence; yasya — whose; na — not; lipyate — is stained; hatva - slaying,
killing; api — even; sah — he; iman — this; lokan — world; na — not; hanti -
slays, kills; na — not; nibadhyate — becomes entangled, is subject to.

He whose nature is not egoistic, whose intellect is not stained, even though
he slays the whole world, slays nothing, and is not subject to bondage.

(18.17)

THE THREE CONSTITUENTS (GUN AS) GIVE MOTIVATION TO

KARMA (VERSES 18 TO 40)

jnanam jneyam parijnata tri-vidha karma-codana
karanam karma karteti tri-vidhah karma-sangrahah (18.18)

jnanam — knowledge; jneyam - the knowable; parijnata — the knower; tri-vidha
— threefold; karma — of action; codana karanam — the instrumental cause of
action; karma — the action; karta — the agent; iti — so; tri-vidhah — threefold;
karma — of action; sangrahah — the basis of action.

Knowledge, the knowable, and the knower, these constitute the threefold
instrumental cause of action (karma). The instrument (or, organ), the action,
and the agent (the doer) form the threefold basis of action. (18.18)

jnanam karma ca karta ca tridhaiva guna-bhedatah
procyate guna-sankhyane yathavac chrnu tany api (18.19)

jnanam — knowledge; karma — action; ca — also; karta — agent; ca — and;
tridha - three in kind; eva — only; guna-bhedatah - distinguished by the three
constituents (Gunas); procyate — are regarded, enunciated ; guna-sankhyane -
according to the distinction of the constituents in the Sankhya philosophy;
yatha-vat — correctly; srnu — listen; tani - them (these); api — also.

Knowledge, action and agent (the doer), these too are three in kind,
distinguished by the three constituents (Gunas), enunciated in the Sankhya
philosophy, according to the distinction of the constituents. Listen correctly
about these also. (18.19)

sarva-bhutesu yenaikam bhavam avyayam iksate
avibhaktam vibhaktesu taj jnanam viddhi sattvikam (18.20)

sarva-bhutesu — in all contingent beings; yena — by which; ekam — one;
bhavam — reality; avyayam — imperishable; iksate - (on) sees; avibhaktam —
undivided; vibhaktesu — in the divided; tat — that; jnanam — knowledge; viddhi
— know; sattvikam - Sattvika, in the mode of goodness.

That knowledge by which one sees the Imperishable Being changeless,
undivided in all contingent beings divided, know that knowledge as Sattvika
(in the mode of goodness). (See also 11.13 and 13.16) (18.20)

prthaktvena tu yaj jnanam nana-bhavan prthag-vidhan
vetti sarvesu bhutesu taj jnanam viddhi rajas am (18.21)

prthaktvena - distinct from one another; tu — but; yat — which; jnanam —
knowledge; nana-bhavan - manifold entities; prthak-vidhan - different (kinds);
vetti — knows; sarvesu — in all; bhutesu - in contingent beings; tat — that;
jnanam — knowledge; viddhi — know; rajasam - Rajasika, in terms of passion.

But the knowledge by which one sees in all contingent beings, manifold
entities of different kinds, distinct from one another, know that knowledge
to be Rajasic (in the mode of passion). (18.21)

yat tu krtsna-vad ekasmin karye saktam ahaitukam
atattvartha-vad alpam ca tat tamasam udahrtam (18.22)

yat — that which; tu — but; krtsna-vat — as if it were the whole; ekasmin - one
single; karye — effect; saktam — attached; ahaitukam — irrational; atattva-artha-
vat - without grasping the Truth (as the object of all-knowledge); alpam —
trivial; ca — and; tat — that; tamasam - Tamasika, in the mode of darkness;
udahrtam — is declared to be.

And that knowledge which concentrates on a single effect as if it were the
whole, irrational, not grasping the Truth as the object of all -knowledge,
trivial and easy, that is declared to be Tamasic (in the mode of ignorance).
(18.22)

niyatam sanga-rahitam araga-dvesatah krtam
aphala-prepsuna karma yat tat sattvikamn ucyate (18.23)

niyatam — prescribed; sanga-rahitam - free from all attachment; araga-
dvesatah — without passion or hatred; krtam — done; aphala-prepsuna — by one
not desirous of the fruit; karma — action; yat — which; tat — that; sattvikam -
Sattvika, in the mode of goodness; ucyate — is called.

A prescribed action (Karma), free from all attachment, performed without
passion, without hate, by one not desirous of the fruit, that action is called
to be Sattvic (in the mode of goodness). (18.23)

yat tu kamepsuna karma sahankarena va punah
kriyate bahulayasam tad rajasam udahrtam (18.24)

yat — that which; tu — but; kama-ipsuna -by one longing for desires; karma —
action; sa-ahankarena — with egoism; va — or; punah — again; kriyate — is
performed, is done; bahula-ayasam — with much effort; tat — that; rajasam -
Rajasika, in the mode of passion; udahrtam — is declared.

But that action which is done by longing for desires, or again with egoism,
or in expanding much effort, that is declared to be Rajasic (in the mode of
passion). (18.24)

anubandham ksayam himsam anapeksya ca paurusam
mohad arabhyate karma yat tat tamasam ucyate (18.25)

anubandham — consequence; ksayam — loss; himsam — injury; anapeksya -
having no thought, regard for; ca — and; paurusam — self-sanctioned, for the
human part one plays himself; mohat - the deluded; arabhyate — is undertaken;
karma — action; yat — which; tat — that; tamasam - Tamasika, in the mode of
ignorance; ucyate — is said to be.

The action which is undertaken by a deluded man, who has no thought of
consequence, loss and injury to others, or for the human part he plays
himself, is called Tamasic (in the mode of ignorance). (18.25)

mukta-sango 'naham-vadi dhrty-utsaha-samanvitah
siddhy-asiddhyor nirvikarah. karta sattvika ucyate (18.26)

mukta-sangah - who is free from attachment; anaham-vadi - not egoistic; dhrti

— steadfast; utsaha — resolute; samanvitah - fit in (steadfastness and resolution);
siddhi - by success; asiddhyoh — and failure; nirvikarah — unaffected; karta —
agent; sattvikah - Sattvika, in the mode of goodness; ucyate — is said to be.

The agent who is free from attachment, not egoistic, steadfast and resolute,
unaffected by success or failure, is said to be Sattvic (good). (18.26)

ragi karma-phala-prepsur lubdho himsatmako 'sucih
harsa-sokanvitah karta rajasah parikirtitah (18.27)

ragi — passionate; karma-phala — to pursue the fruits of action; prepsuh —
desiring; lubdhah — greedy; himsa-atmakah - cruel, intent on doing harm;
asucih — impure; harsa-soka-anvitah — a prey to joy and to sorrow ; karta —
agent; rajasah - Rajasika, in the mode of passion; parikirtitah — is widely
known.

The agent who is passionate, desiring to pursue the fruits of action, greedy,
intent on doing harm, impure, a prey to joy and to sorrow, is widely known
to follow the Rajasic way (the passion's way). (18.27)

ayuktah prakrtah stabdhah satho naiskrtiko 'lasah
visadi dirgha-sutri ca karta tamasa ucyate (18.28)

ayuktah —unsteady; prakrtah - brutish, vulgar; stabdhah - self-important;
sathah — deceitful; naiskrtikah —malicious; alasah — lazy; visadi — depressive;
dirgha-sutri — procrastinating; ca — and; karta — agent; tamasah - Tamasika, in
the mode of ignorance; ucyate — is called.

The agent, unsteady (ayukta), brutish, self-important, malicious, unfair,
lazy, who is subject to depression, who procrastinates, is called Tamasic
(ignorant, to be of darkness). (18.28)

buddher bhedam dhrtes caiva gunatas tri-vidham srnu
procyamanam asesena prthaktvena Dhananjaya (18.29)

buddheh — of the intellect; bhedam — division; dhrteh - constancy, firmness; ca
— and; eva — even; gunatah - arising out of the constituents, by the modes of
material nature, arising out of the Gunas; tri-vidham — threefold; srnu — listen;
procyamanam — as set forth by Me; asesena — in all its many forms;
prthaktvena - omitting nothing; dhananjaya — O Dhananjaya, O Conqueror of
wealth, Arjuna.

Listen to the threefold division of the intellect as well as constancy arising
out of the constituents, which I will set forth in all its many forms, omitting
nothing, O Dhananjaya (O conqueror of wealth, Arjuna). (18.29)

pravrttim ca nivrttim ca karyakarye bhayabhaye
bandham moksam ca ya vetti buddhih sa partha sattvika (18.30)

pravrttim — work; ca — and; nivrttim — cessation; ca — and; karya — what
should to be done; akarye — and what ought not to be done; bhaya — fear;
abhaye — and fearlessness; bandham — bondage; moksam - release, liberation;
ca — and; ya — that; vetti — knows; buddhih — intellect; sa — that; partha — O
Partha, Arjuna; sattviki - Sattvika, in the mode of goodness.

The intellect that distinguishes between action and its cessation, between
what should be done and what not, between fear and fearlessness, bondage
and release, that intellect is Sattvic (in the mode of goodness), O Partha
(Arjuna). (18.30)

yaya dharmam adharmam ca karyam cakaryam eva ca
ayathavat prajanati buddhih sa partha rajasi (18.31)

yaya — by which; dharmam - Dharma (right); adharmam - Adharma (wrong);
ca — and; karyam — what should to be done; ca — also; akaryam — what should
not to be done; eva — even; ca — and; ayatha-vat — untruly; prajanati —
understand; buddhih — intellect; sa — that; partha — O Partha, Arjuna; rajasi -
Rajasika, in the mode of passion.

The intellect by which Dharma and Adharma (right and wrong in the widest
sense; law and lawlessness), and also what should be done and what not, are
untruly understood, that intellect, O Partha (Arjuna) is Rajasic (in the mode
of passion). (18.31)

adharmam dharmam iti ya manyate tamasavrta
sarvarthan viparitams ca buddhih sa partha tamasi (18.32)

adharmam - Adharma (unrighteousness); dharmam - Dharma (righteousness);
iti — so; ya — which; manyate — thinks; tamasa - darkness (seeing the opposite,
seeing contrary to truth); avrta - covered, enveloped, holded; sarva-arthan — all
things; viparitan - distorted view; ca — and; buddhih — intellect; sa — that;
partha — O Partha; tamasi - Tamasika, in the mode of ignorance.

The intellect which holds a distorted view, seeing Adharma
(unrighteousness) as Dharma (righteousness), and see all things their
opposite (all things contrary to truth), that intellect, O Partha (Arjuna), is in
the Tamasic way (in the mode of ignorance) (18.32)

dhrtya yaya dharayate manah-pranendriya-kriyah
yogenavyabhicarinya dhrtih sa partha sattvika (18.33)

dhrtya — constancy; yaya - (by) which; dharayate — holds; manah prana
indriya kriyah - the functions of the mind, the life -breaths (Prana, a Sanskrit
word meaning 'breath' and is understood as the vital, life-sustaining force of all
living beings and the vital energy in all natural processes of the universe), and
the sense organs; yogena — by yoga ; avyabhicarinya — unswerving; dhrtih —
constancy; sa — that; partha - O Partha, Arjuna; sattviki - Sattvika, in the mode
of goodness.

The constancy by which one holds fast, in check the functions of the mind,
the life-breaths (Prana), and the sense organs, unswerving in Yoga (self-
discipline), that constancy, O Partha (Arjuna) , is constancy in the Sattvic
way (in the mode of goodness). (18.33)

yaya tu dharma-kamarthan dhrtya dharayate 'rjuna
prasangena phalakanksi dhrtih sa partha rajasi (18.34)

yaya — by which; tu — but; dharma kama arthan - Dharma (Duty), Kana
(pleasure, sense gratification) and Artha (self-interest, riches or economic
development); dhrtya — by determination, (holding) fast, firmness; dharayate
holds; arjuna — O Arjuna; prasangena - (because of) attachment; phala-akanksi
— desirous of the fruits ; dhrtih — determination; sa — that; partha — O Partha,
Arjuna; rajasi - Rajasika, in the mode of passion.

The constancy by which one holds fast to Dharma (Duty), Kana (pleasure,
sense gratification) and Artha (self-interest, riches or economic development),
adhering to them, desirous of their fruits, O Partha (Arjuna), is constancy in
the Rajasic way (in the mode of passion). (18.34)

yaya svapnam bhayam sokam visadam madam eva ca
na vimuncati durmedha dhrtih sa partha tamasi (18.35)

yaya — by which; svapnam — sleep; bhayam — fear; sokam — grief; visadam —
depression; madam - conceit, vanity, lust; eva — indeed; ca — and; na — not;
vimuncati - giving up; durmedha - the stupid; dhrtih — constancy; sa — that;
partha — O Partha, Arjuna; tamasi - Tamasika, in the mode of ignorance.

That by which a stupid will not let go sleep, fear, grief, depression, and also
lust, is constancy in Tamasic (in the mode of ignorance), O Partha (Arjuna).
(18.35)

sukham tv idanim tri-vidham srnu me bharatarsabha
abhyasad ramate yatra duhkhantam ca nigacchati (18.36)

sukham — pleasure; tu — indeed; idanim — now; tri vidham — threefold; srnu —
hear; me — Me; bharata-rsabha — O best of the Bharatas, Arjuna; abhyasat -
much effort, practise; ramate - (man) enjoys; yatra — where; duhkha - pain,
suffering; antam — the end; ca — and; nigacchati - comes to, attains to.

Threefold too is pleasure, O best of the Bharatas (Arjuna), hear this now
from Me. That in which a man enjoys after much effort spent, and wherein
suffering comes to an end. (18.36)

yat tad agre visam iva pariname 'mrtopamam
tat sukham sattvikam proktam atma-buddhi-prasada-jam (18.37)

yat — which; tat — that; agre - at first; visam iva — like poison; pariname - in
time; amrta — nectar; upamam — like; tat — that; sukham — pleasure; sattvikam -
Sattvika, in the mode of goodness; proktam — is called; atma buddhi prasada-
jam - (it) rises from that serenity which comes from Self-knowledge (atma-
buddhi-prasada, translated 'of one's intellect (soul)' or 'of intellect and self).

Which at first is more like poison, but in time transforms itself in what
seems to be nectar (heavenly food, food of the deities, immortality -giving food)
- is called pleasure the Sattvic way (in the mode of goodness), for it rises
from that serenity which comes from Self-knowledge (dtma-buddhi-prasdda,
translated 'of one 's intellect (soul) ' or 'of intellect and self). (18.37)

visayendriya-samyogad yat tad agre 'mrtopamam
pariname visam iva tat sukham rajasam smrtam (18.38)

visaya indriya samyogat — from the contact of the senses with their objects ; yat

— which; tat — that; agre - at first; amrta-upamam — like nectar; pariname - in
time; visam iva - to be poison; tat — that; sukham — pleasure; rajasam -
Rajasika, in the mode of passion; smrtam — is declared.

That pleasure which at first seems like nectar, arising from the contact of
the senses with their objects, but in time transforms itself in what seems to
be poison, that pleasure is declared the Rajasic way (in the mode of passion).
(See also 5.22)(18.38)

yad agre canubandhe ca sukham mohanam atmanah
nidralasya-pramadottham tat tamasam udahrtam (18.39)

yat — which; agre - at the beginning, at first; ca — and; anubandhe - in the end;
ca — and; sukham — pleasure; mohanam - delusive, deluding; atmanah — of the
self; nidra — sleep; alasya — laziness; pramada — and heedlessness; uttham -
deriving from; tat — that; tamasam - Tamasika, in the mode of ignorance;
udahrtam — is declared.

That pleasure which deludes the self both at the beginning and in the end,
which derives from sleep, laziness and heedlessness, has been declared to be
Tamasic (in the mode of ignorance, darkness). (18.39)

na tad asti prthivyam va divi devesu va punah
sattvam prakrti-jair muktam yad ebhih syat tribhir gunaih (18.40)

na — not; tat — that; asti — is; prthivyam — on earth; va — or; divi — in heaven;
devesu — among the deities (Devas, demigods); va — or; punah — again; sattvam
— being; prakrti-jaih - which is (born of the constituents of Nature - Prakriti -);
muktam — freed; yat — that; ebhih — from these ; syat — is; tribhih - from three;
gunaih - Gunas, constituents of Nature, modes of material nature (Prakriti).

There is no being in heaven or on earth, or even among the deities (Devas,
demigods), which is or even could be free from these three constituents of
Nature (Prakriti). (18.40)

BRAHMAN AS, KSATRIYAS, VAISYAS, AND THE SUDRAS AS

FOURFOLD
GROUPS OF PEOPLE EXPLAINED

brahmana-ksatriya-visam sudranam ca parantapa
karmani pravibhaktani svabhava-prabhavair gunaih (18.41)

brahmana ksatriya visam — Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, and Vaisyas; sudranam — of
the Sudras; ca — and; parantapa — O Parantapa, Arjuna; karmani — duties;
pravibhaktani — are assigned; svabhava prabhavaih - arise (born) from the
nature of things, arise (born) of their own nature; gunaih - by the constituents,
by the qualities.

The duties of the Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, Vaisyas, and also the Sudras, O
Parantapa (O vanquisher of foes, Arjuna), are variously assigned by these
constituents, and they arise from the nature of things as they are (svabhdva).
(See also 4.13) (18.41)

samo damas tapah saucam ksantir arjavam eva ca
jnanam vijnanam astikyam brahma-karma svabhava-jam (18.42)

samah — serenity; damah — self-control; tapah — austerity; saucam — purity;
ksantih - patience, tolerance; arjavam — honesty; eva — even; ca — and; jnanam
— knowledge (in theory); vijnanam - realisation, bringing into practise; astikyam
— belief; brahma karma — the duties of Brahmanas; svabhavajam - arising from
own nature.

Serenity, self-control, austerities (penance, ascetic practise), purity, patience
and honesty, spiritual knowledge in theory as in practise (knowledge and
realisation), belief in a hereafter, these are the duties of Brahmanas, arising
from their nature. (18.42)

sauryam tejo dhrtir daksyam yuddhe capy apalayanam
danam isvara-bhavas ca ksatram karma svabhava-jam (18.43)

sauryam — heroism; tejah — ardour; dhrtih — fortitude; daksyam — skill; yuddhe
— from battle; ca — and; api — also; apalayanam — not fleeting; danam —
generosity; isvara — of lordliness; bhavah — the nature; ca — and; ksatram — of
the Ksatriyas; karma — action; svabhava-jam - arising from the nature.

Heroism, ardour, fortitude, skill, not fleeting from battle, generosity and
lordliness are the duties of the Ksatriyas (protectors), arising from their own
nature. (18.43)

krsi-go-raksya-vanijyam vaishya-karma svabhava-jam
paricaryatmakam karma sudrasyapi svabhava-jam (18.44)

krsi - till (the fields); go — cattle; raksya — rearing; vanijyam — trade; vaishya
of the Vaisyas; karma — duty; svabhava jam - arising of the nature; paricarya
service; atmakam — consisting; karma — duty; sudrasya — of the Sudras; api
also; svabhava-jam — born of his own nature, the natural work.

To till the fields (agriculture), rearing cattle and trade are the duties of the
Vaisyas, arising from their nature; but work which consists in service is the
natural work of the Sudras. (11.44)

sve sve karmany abhiratah samsiddhim labhate narah
sva-karma-niratah siddhim yatha vindati tac chrnu (11.45)

sve sve — each to his own; karmani — duty; abhiratah - devoted, by devotion;
samsiddhim — perfection; labhate — attains; narah — a man; sva-karma — in his
own duty; niratah — engaged; siddhim — perfection; yatha — how; vindati —
attains; tat — that; srnu — listen.

By devotion each to his own duty (karma), every man attains perfection.
Listen how a man perfects himself through devotion to his own duty
(karma). (11.45)

yatah pravrttir bhutanam yena sarvam idam tatam
sva-karmana tarn abhyarcya siddhim vindati manavah (18.46)

yatah — from whom; pravrttih — the source; bhutanam — of all beings; yena —
by whom; sarvam — all; idam — this; tatam — is pervaded; sva-karmana - of his
duty; tarn — Him; abhyarcya — by worshiping; siddhim — perfection; vindati —
attains; manavah — man.

He, Who is the source of all beings' activity (pravrtti), and by Whom this
whole universe pervades, by worshipping Him in the performance of his
duty, man attains perfection. (See also 9.27, 12.10) (18.46)

sreyan sva-dharmo vigunah para-dharmat sv-anusthitat
svabhava-niyatam karma kurvan napnoti kilbisam (18.47)

sreyan — better; sva-dharmah — one's own natural duty; vigunah - though
devoid of merit; para-dharmat — than to achieve another's; su-anusthitat - even
well-performed; svabhava-niyatam - imposed by his own nature; karma - duty,
action; kurvan — fulfilling; na — not; apnoti — incurs; kilbisam — sin.

Better to achieve one's own natural duty (natural duty: that for which he is
innate to do), though devoid of merit, than to achieve another's even well
performed. He who fulfils the duty (Dharma) imposed by his own nature, he
incurs no sin. (See also 3.35, 5.10, 18.07, 18.09, 18.17, 18.23)) (18.47)

saha-jam karma Kaunteya sa-dosam api na tyajet
sarvarambha hi dosena dhumenagnir ivavrtah (18.48)

saha-jam - to which born; karma - duty, action; kaunteya - O Kaunteya, O son
of Kunti, Arjuna; sa-dosam - (though) defective; api - even, although; na — not;
tyajet — one should give up; sarva-arambhah — all entreprises; hi — for; dosena
— with fault; dhumena — by smoke; agnih — fire; rva — as; avrtah - (are) veiled.

Never should one give up the duty to which he is born, though defective it
may be, O son of Kunti (Arjuna); for all enterprises are veiled in faults as
fire by smoke. (18.48)

KARMA YOGA IS KARMA SANNYASA

asakta-buddhih sarvatra jitatma vigata-sprhah
naiskarmya-siddhim paramam sannyasenadhigacchati (18.49)

asakta-buddhih - whose mind is unattached; sarvatra — everywhere ;jita-atma -
whose self is subdued; vigata-sprhah - all desires gone; naiskarmya-siddhim -
free from bondage to works; paramam — supreme; sannyasena — by means of
renunciation; adhigacchati — one reaches.

The one whose mind is unattached to anything, whose self is subdued, all
desires gone, by means of renunciation reaches the supreme state, free from
bondage to works (naiskarmya-siddhim: the perfection consisting in freedom
from action). (18.49)

siddhim prapto yatha brahma tathapnoti nibodha me
samasenaiva Kaunteya nistha jnanasya ya para (18.50)

siddhim — perfection; praptah — attained; yatha — as; brahma — Brahman; tatha
— that; apnoti — one reaches; nibodha — learn; me — from Me; samasena - in
brief; eva — even; kaunteya - O Kaunteya, O son of Kunti, Arjuna; nistha — the
state; jnanasya — of knowledge; ya — which; para - supreme, highest.

Learn from Me, in brief, how the one having attained perfection, reaches
Brahman, O son of Kunti (O Kaunteya, Arjuna), that supreme state of
knowledge. (18.50)

buddhya visuddhaya yukto dhrtyatmanam niyamya ca
sabdadin visayams tyaktva raga-dvesau vyudasya ca (18.51)

buddhya - in a intellect; visuddhaya — purified; yuktah — absorbed; dhrtya -
with constancy; atmanam — the self; niyamya - self-control; ca — and; sabda-
adin - sound and other; visayan — the sense objects; tyaktva — detached; raga —
attraction; dvesau — and aversion; vyudasya — discarding; ca - also.

Absorbed in a purified intellect (buddhi, reason, soul-vision kept pure), self-
controlled with constancy, detached from the things of sense, sound and
other objects, and discarding attraction and aversion; (18.51)

vivikta-sevi laghv-asi yata-vak-kaya-manasah
dhyana-yoga-paro nityam vairagyam samupasritah (18.52)

vivikta-sevi - dwell in solitude, living in a secluded place; laghu-asi — eating
lightly; yata vak kaya manasah — with speech, body and mind controlled ;
dhyana-yoga-parah — absorbed in divine meditation; nityam — ever; vairagyam
— dispassion; samupasritah - taking refuge in (solitude).

Let one dwell in solitude, eat lightly, with speech, body and mind controlled,
ever absorbed in divine meditation (union through soul-vision in yoga),
cultivating dispassion; (18.52)

ahankaram balam darpam kamam krodham parigraham
vimucya nirmamah santo brahma-bhuyaya kalpate (18.53)

ahankaram — egotism; balam — power; darpam — pride; kamam - lust, desire;
krodham — anger; parigraham — possessiveness; vimucya nirmamah - free from
the "me and mine" consciousness; santah — peaceful; brahma-bhuyaya — for
becoming one with Brahman; kalpate — is fit.

Giving up egotism, power, pride, desire (lust), anger, possessiveness, free
from the 'me and mine' consciousness, serene, he is fit to become one with
Brahman. (11.53)

brahma-bhutah prasannatma na socati na kanksati
samah sarvesu bhutesu mad-bhaktim labhate param (18.54)

brahma-bhutah - become (absorbed) in Brahman; prasanna-atma - serene in
the Self; na — not; socati — grieves; na — not; kanksati — desires; samah - the
same; sarvesu — to all; bhutesu - contingent beings; mat-bhaktim - devotion
towards Me; labhate — gains; param — supreme.

Becoming absorbed in Brahman, serene in the Self, he grieves not nor
desires; equal to all contingent beings, he gains supreme devotion towards
Me. (18.54)

bhaktya mam abhijanati yavan yas casmi tattvatah
tato mam tattvato jnatva visate tad-anantaram (18.55)

bhaktya - by supreme (highest) devotion; mam — Me; abhijanati - he realises
Me, knows Me; yavan — what; yah ca asmi — as I (really) am; tattvatah — in
truth; tatah — then; mam — Me; tattvatah — in truth; jnatva — knowing; visate —
he enters; tat-anantaram - immediately (into the 'That') into the Supreme.

By supreme devotion (meaning, love and loyalty) he realises Me as I really
am, who and what I am. Then, knowing Me in truth, he immediately enters
into the Supreme (he enters into 'That'). (See also 5.19) (18.55)

sarva-karmany api sada kurvano mad-vyapasrayah
mat-prasadad avapnoti sasvatam padam avyayam (18.56)

sarva — all; karmani — actions; api — also; sada — always; kurvanah —
undertaking; mat-vyapasrayah - taking refuge in Me; mat-prasadat — by My
grace; avapnoti — one attains; sasvatam — the eternal; padam - abode, state;
avyayam — changeless.

Undertaking continually all manner of actions, taking refuge in Me, for by
My grace he will attain the eternal, changeless state (pada). (18.56)

cetasa sarva-karmani mayi sannyasya mat-parah
buddhi-yogam upasritya mac-cittah satatam bhava (18.57)

cetasa — mentally; sarva-karmani — all actions; mayi — to Me; sannyasya —
dedicating; mat-parah - regarding Me as the Supreme; buddhi-yogam - the
yoga of discrimination, union through discrimative knowledge or yoga of
understanding; upasritya — relying; mat-cittah - thinking (on Me); satatam —
constantly; bhava- be.

Mentally dedicating all actions to Me, regarding Me as the Supreme,
relying on buddhi-yoga (union through discriminative knowledge, or yoga of
understanding), think constantly on Me. (18.57)

EGOISM IS HARMFUL ON THE SPIRITUAL LADDER TO THE

SUPREME

mac-cittah sarva-durgani mat-prasadat tarisyasi
atha cet tvam ahankaran na srosyasi vinanksyasi (18.58)

mat cittah - fixing the mind; sarva — all; durgani — dangers; mat-prasadat — by
My grace; tarisyasi — you will overcome; atha — but; cet — if; rvara — you;
ahankarat — selfishness; na srosyasi — do not listen, will not listen; vinanksyasi
— you will meet destruction.

Fixing your mind on Me, by My grace you will overcome all dangers, but if
through selfishness you will not listen, then you will meet destruction.
(18.58)

yad ahankaram asritya na yotsya iti manyase
mithyaisa vyavasayas te prakrtis tvam niyoksyati (18.59)

yat — if; ahankaram - self-assertion, egotism; asritya — taking shelter; na yotsye
— I will not fight; iti — thus; manyase — you think; mithya - vain; esah — this;
vyavasayah — resolution; te — your; prakrtih — inborn nature; tvam — you;
niyoksyati — will constrain.

But if through self-assertion you think, 'I will not fight', vain is your
resolution, for Prakriti, your inborn nature will constrain you. (11.59)

svabhava-jena Kaunteya nibaddhah svena karmana
kartum necchasi yan mohat karisyasy avaso 'pi tat (18.60)

svabhava-jena - own nature-born action; kaunteya - O Kaunteya, O son of
Kunti, Arjuna; nibaddhah — bound; svena — own; karmana — action; kartum —
to do; na — not; icchasi — you wish; yat — that; mohat - through delusion;
karisyasi — you will do; avasah - against own will; api — also; tat — that.

O son of Kunti (O Kaunteya, Arjuna), being bound by the karma of your
own nature-born action, you will have to do that which is against your will,
and through delusion you do not wish to do. (18.60)

ALL KARMA BELONGS TO THE SUPREME (ISWARA)

isvarah sarva-bhutanam hrd-dese 'rjuna tisthati
bhramayan sarva-bhutani yantrarudhani mayaya (18.61)

isvarah — the Lord; sarva-bhutanam — of all contingent beings; hrt-dese — in
the heart; arjuna — O Arjuna; tisthati — dwells; bhramayan - making to whirl;
sarva-bhutani — all contingent beings; y antra arudhani - fixed in a machine;
mayaya - illusive power.

The Lord dwells in the region of the heart of all contingent beings, O
Arjuna, and by His illusive power (Maya) making them all whirl as if fixed
in a machine. (18.61)

tarn eva saranam gaccha sarva-bhavena bharata
tat-prasadat param santim sthanam prapsyasi sasvatam (18.62)

tarn — in Him; eva — even; saranam gaccha - find refuge; sarva-bhavena - with
all your being; bharata — O Bharata, Arjuna; tat-prasadat — by His grace;
param — supreme; santim — peace; sthanam — the abode; prapsyasi — you shall
obtain; sasvatam - eternal (state).

O Bharata (Arjuna), in Him alone find refuge with all your being, and all
your love (bhdva); and by His grace you shall obtain supreme peace, the
eternal state. (18.62)

FREEDOM OF THE SEEKER INTO TRUTH

iti te jnanam akhyatam guhyad guhyataram may a
vimrsyaitad asesena yathecchasi tatha kuru (18.63)

iti — thus; te — to you; jnanam — knowledge; akhyatam — declared; guhyat - the
mysteries; guhya-taram — the most mysterious; may a — by Me; vimrsya -
contemplate; etat — on this; asesena — fully; yatha — as; icchasi — you wish;
tatha — that; kuru - do, act.

Of all mysteries most mysterious, this knowledge have I declared to you,
contemplate on it in all its amplitude, and do whatever you wish to do.
(18.63)

THE RESULTS OF SELF-SURRENDER

sarva-guhyatamam bhuyah srnu me paramam vacah
isto 'si me drdham iti tato vaksyami te hitam (18.64)

sarva-guhya-tamam — the most mysterious of all; bhuyah — again; srnu — listen;
me — from Me; paramam - (My) supreme; vacah — word; istah asi - beloved
(friend); me — to Me; drdham - (beloved) friend; iti — so; tatah — therefore;
vaksyami — I am telling; te — you; hitam - (that which is) beneficial.

Listen once again to My supreme word, of all the most mysterious; because
you are My beloved friend, I will, therefore, tell you that which is beneficial
for you. (18.64)

man-mana bhava mad-bhakto mad-yaji mam namaskuru
mam evaishyasi satyam te pratijane priyo 'si me (18.65)

mat-manah - your mind absorb in Me; bhava — be; mat-bhaktah - (be) My
devotee; mat-yaji - sacrifice to Me; mam - to Me; namaskuru - prostrate
(yourself before Me); mam — to Me; eva — even; esyasi — you shall come;
satyam — truth; te — to you; pratijane — I promise; priyah — dear; asi — you are;
me — to Me.

Absorb your mind in Me, be My devotee, sacrifice to Me (resign all things to
Me), prostrate yourself before Me: I promise you, in this way you shall
come to Me, for in truth you are dear to Me. (18.65)

sarva-dharman parityajya mam ekam saranam vraja
aham tvam sarva-papebhyo moksayisyami ma sucah (18.66)

sarva-dharman — all other dharmas (duties); parityajya — forsaking; mam — to
Me; ekam — only; saranam — refuge; vraja — take; aham — I; tvam — you; sarva
papebhyah — from all evils; moksayisyami — will deliver; ma — not; sucah -
grieve.

Forsaking all other dharmas (duties), turn to Me, your only refuge, for I will
deliver you of all evils. Do not grieve. (18.66)

APTITUDES FOR TEACHING THE BHAGAVAD GIT A

idam te natapaskaya nabhaktaya kadacana
na casusrusave vacyam na ca mam yo 'bhyasuyati (18.67)

idam — this; te — by you; na — not; atapaskaya - whose life is devoid of
asceticism; na — not; abhaktaya - who has no devotion; kadacana — at any
time; na — never; ca — and; asusrusave - who refuses to obey (or, render
service); vacyam — to be spoken; na — not; ca — and; mam - of Me; yah - one
who; abhyasuyati — is envious, cavils at.

Never should you speak about this to anyone, whose life is devoid of
asceticism (austerity, penance), who has no devotion (bhakta: love and
loyalty), who refuses to obey, or to one who speaks ill of Me. (18.67)

ya idam paramam guhyam mad-bhaktesv abhidhasyati
bhaktim mayi param krtva mam evaishyaty asamsayah (18.68)

yah — who; idam — this; paramam — supreme; guhyam - secret (knowledge);
mat bhaktesu - to my loving devotees; abhidhasyati — impart; bhaktim —
devotion; mayi — to Me; par am - highest (supreme); krtva — showing; mam — to
Me; eva — even; esyati - will come; asamsayah — without doubt.

But whoever shall impart to My loving devotees this supreme secret
knowledge, showing the highest devotion (bhakti: love and loyalty) to Me,
will come and reach Me without doubt. (18.68)

na ca tasman manusyesu kascin me priya-krttamah
bhavita na ca me tasmad anyah priyataro bhuvi (18.69)

na — not; ca — and; tasmat — than someone; manusyesu — among men; kascit —
any; me — to Me; priya-krt-tamah — more pleasing service; bhavita - shall be;
na — not; ca — and; me — to Me; tasmat — than he (like this); anyah — another;
priya-tarah — dearer; bhuvi - on earth.

No one among mankind can render Me more pleasing service than someone
like this; nor shall any other one on earth be dearer to Me. (18.69)

adhyesyate ca ya imam dharmyam samvadam avayoh
jnana-yajnena tenaham istah syam iti me matih (18.70)

adhyesyate - who studies, is studying; ca — and; yah — who; imam — this;
dharmyam — sacred; samvadam — dialogue; avayoh — of ours; jnana — of
knowledge; yajnena — by the sacrifice; tena — by him; aham — I; istah —
worshipped; syam - (I) shall, (this is); iti — so; me — My; matih - promise.

The one, who studies this sacred dialogue of ours, will be worshipping Me
by the sacrifice (Yajna) of knowledge. This is My promise. (18.70)

sraddhavan anasuyas ca srnuyad api yo narah
so 'pi muktah subhal lokan prapnuyat punya-karmanam (18.71)

sraddha-van - full of faith; anasuyah — not cavilling; ca — and; srnuyat - have
you listened; api — also; yah — who; narah — man; sah — he; api — also; muktah
— being liberated, being freed; subhan — happy; lokan — worlds; prapnuyat -
(he) attains; punya-karmanam — of those whose works are pure.

Even that individual full of faith (shraddha), not cavilling, who merely
listens to and heeds this sacred dialogue, will be free from evil, and attain
the blessed worlds of those whose works are pure. (18.71)

THE DAWN OF KNOWLEDGE

kaccid etac chrutam Partha tvayaikagrena cetasa
kaccid ajnana-sammohah pranastas te Dhananjaya (18.72)

kaccit — whether; etat — this; srutam — heard; partha — O Partha, Arjuna; tvaya
— by you; eka-agrena - in singleness; cetasa - of mind; kaccit — whether;
ajnana sammohah - the delusion born ignorance; pranastah — destroyed; te —
you; dhananjaya - O Dhananiaya, O conqueror of wealth , Arjuna.

O Partha (Arjuna), have you listened to this knowledge (to this My word) in
singleness of mind (an attentive mind)? O Dhananjaya (Arjuna), has the
confusion linked to delusion-born ignorance been thoroughly destroyed?

(18.72)

arjuna uvaca
nasto mohah smrtir labdha tvat-prasadan mayacyuta
sthito 'mi gata-sandehah karisye vacanam tava (18.73)

arjunah uvaca — Arjuna said; nastah — destroyed; mohah - confusion, delusion;
smrtih - thinking, memory; labdha - got back, has been gained, regained; tvat-
prasadat — by Your grace; may a — by me; acyuta - O Achyuta, O infallible
Krsna (The different names of the Supreme Lord Krsna and Arjuna are very
important in the Bhagavad GTta as they have a meaning according to different
circumstances and relationships, and have something to tell the reader for own
spiritual growth. A number of even outstanding translators omit them, and that
is unacceptable. The translator endeavoured as far as he possibly could to
translate the "Song of God" as it should be); sthitah — firm; asmi - (I) am; gata
sandehah - with doubts dispelled; karisye - (I) stand ready; vacanam — word;
tava — Your.

Arjuna said: Destroyed is the confusion, I have got back my proper way of
thinking (smrti) (I have got back my memory) through Your grace, O
Achyuta (O unfallen One, O immutable One, Krsna). With doubts dispelled I
stand ready to act according to Your word. (18.73)

SAN J A YA 'S CONCL USIVE DE CLARA TION

sanjaya uvaca
ity aham vasudevasya parthasya ca mahatmanah
samvadam imam asrausam adbhutam roma-harsanam (18.74)

sanjayah uvaca — Sanjaya said; iti — so; aham — I; vasudevasya - of Vasudeva,
Krsna ; parthasya - of Partha, Arjuna; ca — and; maha-atmanah — of the great
soul, high-souled; samvadam — dialogue; imam — this; asrausam - (I) did heard;
adbhutam — wonderful; roma-harsanam — causing the hair stand on end.

Sanjaya said: I did hear this wondrous dialogue of Vasudeva (Vasudeva 's
son, Krsna) and the high-souled Partha (Arjuna), causing my hair to stand
on end. (18.74)

vyasa-prasadac chrutavan etad guhyam aham param
yogam yogesvarat krsnat saksat kathayatah svayam (18.75)

vyasa-prasadat — by Vyasa's favour ; srutavan - I have heard; etat — this;
guhyam — secret; aham — I; param — supreme; yogam — yoga; yoga-isvarat —
from the Lord of yoga; krsnat — from Krsna; saksat — directly; kathayatah —
relating; svayam — himself.

By Vyasa's favour have I heard this supreme secret Yoga from the Lord,
Krsna Himself, relating it before me. (18.75)

rajan samsmrtya samsmrtya samvadam imam adbhutam
kesavarjunayoh punyam hrsyami ca muhur muhuh (18.76)

rajan — O King; samsmrtya — recalling; samsmrtya — recalling; samvadam —
dialogue; imam — this; adbhutam — marvellous; kesava - Kesava, Krsna;
arjunayoh — and Arjuna; punyam — holy; hrsyami — I thrill with joy; ca — and;
muhuh muhuh - again and again, repeatedly.

O King (King Dhrtarastra) recalling over and over again this marvellous
and holy dialogue of Kesava (Krsna) and Arjuna, I thrill with joy again and
again. (18.76)

tac ca samsmrtya samsmrtya rupam aty-adbhutam hareh
vismayo me mahan rajan hrsyami ca punah punah (18.77)

tat — that; ca — and; samsmrtya - having recalled; samsmrtya - having recalled;
rupam - the form; ati - greatly, utterly; adbhutam — marvellous; hareh - of
Hari, of Krsna; vismayah — amazement; me — my; mahan — great; rajan — O
King; hrsyami — I am enjoying, I thrill with joy; ca — and; punah punah - again
and again, repeatedly.

And as often as I recall that utterly marvellous form of Hari (Krsna), great
is my amazement, O King (King Dhrtardstra), I thrill with joy, and thrill
with joy again! (18.77)

yatra yogesvarah krsno yatra partho dhanur-dharah
tatra srir vijayo bhutir dhruva nitir matir mama (18.78)

yatra — whenever; yoga-isvarah — the Lord of yoga; krsnah — Krsna; yatra —
wherever; parthah - Partha, the son of Partha; dhanuh-dharah - the archer, the
carrier of the bow and arrow; tatra — there; srih — prosperity; vijayah — victory;
bhutih — happiness; dhruva — firm; nitih — morality; matih mama — my opinion.

Whenever Krsna, the Lord of Yoga is; wherever is Partha (Arjuna) the
Archer, there is prosperity, victory, happiness, and firm morality, this is my
conviction. (18.78)

In the Upanisad of the Bhagavadglta, the knowledge of Brahman the

Supreme, the science of yoga, and the dialogue between Srlkrsna and

Arjuna, this is the eighteenth discourse entitled, "The Yoga of Liberation

through Renunciation".
